Line 1000: [= Line 1: I was the shadow of the waxwing slain]
Through the back of John's thin cotton shirt one could distinguish patches of pink
where it stuck to the skin above and around the outline of the funny little garment he
wore under the shirt as all good Americans do. I see with such awful clarity one fat
shoulder rolling, the other rising; his gray mop of hair, his creased nape; the red
bandanna handkerchief limply hanging out of one hip pocket, the wallet bulge of the
other; the broad deformed pelvis; the grass stains on the seat of his old khaki pants,
the scuffed back seams of his loafers; and I hear his delightful growl as he looks back
at me, without stopping, to say something like: "Be sure not to spill anything - this is
not a paper chase," or, [wincing] "I'll have to write again to Bob Wells [the town
mayor] about those damned Thursday night trucks."
We had reached the Goldsworth side of the lane, and the flagged walk that scrambled
along the side lawn to connect with the gravel path leading up from Dulwich Road to
the Goldsworth front door, when Shade remarked, "You have a caller."
In profile to us on the porch a short thickset, dark-haired man in a brown suit stood
holding by its ridiculous strap a shabby and shapeless briefcase, his curved forefinger
still directed toward the bell button he had just pressed.
"I will kill him," I muttered. Recently a bonneted girl had made me accept a bunch of
religious tracts and had told me her brother, whom for some reason I had pictured to
myself as a fragile neurotic youth, would drop in to discuss with me God's Purpose,
and explain everything I had not understood in the tracts. Youth, indeed!
Had I ever seen Gradus before? Let me think. Had I? Memory shakes her head.
Nevertheless the killer affirmed to me later that once from my tower, overlooking the
Palace orchard, I had waved to him as he and one of my former pages, a boy with hair
like excelsior, were carrying cradled glass from the hothouse to a horse-drawn van;
but, as the caller now veered toward us and transfixed us with his snake-sad, close-set
eyes, I felt such a tremor of recognition that had I been in bed dreaming I would have
awoken with a groan.
His first bullet ripped a sleeve button off my black blazer, another sang past my ear. It
is evil piffle to assert that he aimed not at me (whom he had just seen in the library let us be consistent, gentlemen, ours is a rational world after all), but at the graylocked gentleman behind me. Oh, he was aiming at me all right but missing me every
time, the incorrigible bungler, as I instinctively backed, bellowing and spreading my
great strong arms (with my left hand still holding the poem, "still clutching the
inviolable shade," to quote Matthew Arnold, 1822-1888), in an effort to halt the
advancing madman and shield John, whom I feared he might, quite accidentally, hit,
while he, my sweet, awkward old John, kept clawing at me and pulling me after him,
back to the protection of his laurels, with the solemn fussiness of a poor lame boy
trying to get his spastic brother out of the range of the stones hurled at them by
schoolchildren, once a familiar sight in all countries. I felt - I still feel - John's hand
fumbling at mine, seeking my fingertips, finding them, only to abandon them at once
as if passing to me, in a sublime relay race, the baton of life.
One of the bullets that spared me struck him in the side and went through his heart.
His presence behind me abruptly failing me caused me to lose my balance, and,
simultaneously, to complete the farce of fate, my gardener's spade dealt gunman Jack
from behind the hedge a tremendous blow on the pate, felling him and sending his
weapon flying from his grasp. Our savior retrieved it and helped me to my feet. My
coccyx and right wrist hurt badly but the poem was safe. John, though, lay prone on
the ground, with a red spot on his white shirt. I still hoped he had not been killed. The
madman sat on the porch step, dazedly nursing with bloody hands a bleeding head.
Leaving the gardener to watch over him I hurried into the house and concealed the
invaluable envelope under a heap of girls' galoshes, furred snowboots and white
wellingtons heaped at the bottom of a closet, from which I exited as if it had been the
end of the secret passage that had taken me all the way out of my enchanted castle and
right from Zembla to this Arcady. I then dialed 11111 and returned with a glass of
water to the scene of the carnage. The poor poet had now been turned over and lay
with open dead eyes directed up at the sunny evening azure. The armed gardener and
the battered killer were smoking side by side on the steps. The latter, either because
he was in pain, or because he had decided to play a new role, ignored me as
completely as if I were a stone king on a stone charger in the Tessera Square of
Onhava; but the poem was safe.
The gardener took the glass of water I had placed near a flowerpot beside the porch
steps and shared it with the killer, and then accompanied him to the basement toilet,
and presently the police and the ambulance arrived, and the gunman gave his name as
Jack Grey, no fixed abode, except the Institute for the Criminal Insane, ici, good dog,
which of course should have been his permanent address all along, and which the
police thought he had just escaped from.
"Come along, Jack, we'll put something on that head of yours," said a calm but
purposeful cop stepping over the body, and then there was the awful moment when Dr.
Sutton's daughter drove up with Sybil Shade.
In the course of that chaotic night I found a moment to transfer the poem from under
the booties of Goldsworth's four nymphets to the austere security of my black valise,
but only at daybreak did I find it safe enough to examine my treasure.
We know how firmly, how stupidly I believed that Shade was composing a poem, a
kind of romaunt, about the King of Zembla. We have been prepared for the horrible
disappointment in store for me. Oh, I did not expect him to devote himself completely
to that theme! It might have been blended of course with some of his own life stuff
and sundry Americana - but I was sure his poem would contain the wonderful
incidents I had described to him, the characters I had made alive for him and all the
unique atmosphere of my kingdom. I even suggested to him a good title - the title of
the book in me whose pages he was to cut: Solus Rex, instead of which I saw Pale
Fire, which meant to me nothing. I started to read the poem. I read faster and faster. I
sped through it, snarling, as a furious young heir through an old deceiver's testament.
Where were the battlements of my sunset castle? Where was Zembla the Fair? Where
her spine of mountains? Where her long thrill through the mist? And my lovely flower
boys, and the spectrum of the stained windows, and the Black Rose Paladins, and the
whole marvelous tale?
Nothing of it was there! The complex contribution I had been pressing upon him with
a hypnotist's patience and a lover's urge was simply not there. Oh, but I cannot
express the agony! Instead of the wild glorious romance - what did I have? An
autobiographical, eminently Appalachian, rather old-fashioned narrative in a neoPopian prosodic style - beautifully written of course - Shade could not write otherwise
than beautifully - but void of my magic, of that special rich streak of magical madness
which I was sure would run through it and make it transcend its time.
Gradually I regained my usual composure. I reread Pale Fire more carefully. I liked it
better when expecting less. And what was that? What was that dim distant music,
those vestiges of color in the air? Here and there I discovered in it and especially,
especially in the invaluable variants, echoes and spangles of my mind, a long
ripplewake of my glory. I now felt a new, pitiful tenderness toward the poem as one
has for a fickle young creature who has been stolen and brutally enjoyed by a black
giant but now again is safe in our hall and park, whistling with the stableboys,
swimming with the tame seal. The spot still hurts, it must hurt, but with strange
gratitude we kiss those heavy wet eyelids and caress that polluted flesh.
My commentary to this poem, now in the hands of my readers, represents an attempt
to sort out those echoes and wavelets of fire, and pale phosphorescent hints, and all
the many subliminal debts to me. Some of my notes may sound bitter - but I have
done my best not to air any grievances. And in this final scholium my intention is not
to complain of the vulgar and cruel nonsense that professional reporters and Shade's
"friends" in the obituaries they concocted allowed themselves to spout when
misdescribing the circumstances of Shade's death. I regard their references to me as a
mixture of of journalistic callousness and the venom of vipers. I do not doubt that
many of the statements made in this work will be brushed aside by the guilty parties
when it is out. Mrs. Shade will not remember having been shown by her husband
"who showed her everything" one or two of the precious variants. The three students
lying on the grass will turn out to be totally amnesic. The desk girl at the Library will
not recall (will have been told not to recall) anybody asking for Dr. Kinbote on the
day of the murder. And I am sure that Mr. Emerald will interrupt briefly his
investigation of some mammate student's resilient charms to deny with the vigor of
roused virility that he ever gave anybody a lift to my house that evening. In other
words, everything will be done to cut off my person completely from my dear friend's
fate.
Nevertheless, I have had my little revenge: public misapprehension indirectly helped
me to obtain the right of publishing Pale Fire. My good gardener, when
enthusiastically relating to everybody what he had seen, certainly erred in several
respects - not so much perhaps in his exaggerated account of my "heroism" as in the
assumption that Shade had been deliberately aimed at by the so-called Jack Grey; but
Shade's widow found herself so deeply affected by the idea of my having "thrown
myself" between the gunman and his target that during a scene I shall never forget,
she cried out, stroking my hands: "There are things for which no recompense in this
world or another is great enough." That "other world" comes in handy when
misfortune befalls the infidel but I let it pass of course, and, indeed, resolved not to
refute anything, saying instead: "Oh, but there is a recompense, my dear Sybil. It may
seem to you a very modest request but - give me the permission, Sybil, to edit and
publish John's last poem." The permission was given at once, with new cries and new
hugs, and already next day her signature was under the agreement I had a quick little
lawyer draw up. That moment of grateful grief you soon forgot, dear girl. But I assure
you that I do not mean any harm, and that John Shade perhaps, will not be too much
annoyed by my notes, despite the intrigues and the dirt.
Because of these machinations I was confronted with nightmare problems in my
endeavors to make people calmly see - without having them immediately scream and
hustle me - the truth of the tragedy - a tragedy in which I had been not a "chance
witness" but the protagonist, and the main, if only potential, victim. The hullabaloo
ended by affecting the course of my new life, and necessitated my removal to this
modest mountain cabin; but I did manage to obtain, soon after his detention, an
interview, perhaps even two interviews, with the prisoner. He was now much, more
lucid than when he cowered bleeding on my porch step, and he told me all I wanted to
know. By making him believe I could help him at his trial I forced him to confess his
heinous crime - his deceiving the police and the nation by posing as Jack Grey,
escapee from an asylum, who mistook Shade for the man who sent him there. A few
days later, alas, he thwarted justice by slitting his throat with a safety razor blade
salvaged from an unwatched garbage container. He died, not so much because having
played his part in the story he saw no point in existing any longer, but because he
could not live down this last crowning botch - killing the wrong person when the right
one stood before him. In other words, his life ended not in a feeble splutter of the
clockwork but in a gesture of humanoid despair. Enough of this. Exit Jack Grey.
I cannot recall without a shudder the lugubrious week that I spent in New Wye before
leaving it, I hope, forever. I lived in constant fear that robbers would deprive me of
my tender treasure. Some of my readers may laugh when they learn that I fussily
removed it from my black valise to an empty steel box in my landlord's study, and a
few hours later took the manuscript out again, and for several days wore it, as it were,
having distributed the ninety-two index cards about my person, twenty in the righthand pocket of my coat, as many in the left-hand one, a batch of forty against my
right nipple and the twelve precious ones with variants in my innermost left-breast
pocket. I blessed my royal stars for having taught myself wife work, for I now sewed
up all four pockets. Thus with cautious steps, among deceived enemies, I circulated,
plated with poetry, armored with rhymes, stout with another man's song, stiff with
cardboard, bullet-proof at long last.
Many years ago - how many I would not care to say - I remember my Zemblan nurse
telling me, a little man of six in the throes of adult insomnia: "Minnamin, Gut mag
alkan, Pern dirstan" (my darling, God makes hungry, the Devil thirsty). Well, folks, I
guess many in this fine hall are as hungry and thirsty as me, and I'd better stop, folks,
right here.
Yes, better stop. My notes and self are petering out. Gentlemen, I have suffered very
much, and more than any of you can imagine. I pray for the Lord's benediction to rest
on my wretched countrymen. My work is finished. My poet is dead.
"And you, what will you be doing with yourself, poor King, poor Kinbote?" a gentle
young voice may inquire.
God will help me, I trust, to rid myself of any desire to follow the example of two
other characters in this work. I shall continue to exist. I may assume other disguises,
other forms, but I shall try to exist. I may turn up yet, on another campus, as an old,
happy, healthy, heterosexual Russian, a writer in exile, sans fame, sans future, sans
audience, sans anything but his art. I may join forces with Odon in a new motion
picture: Escape from Zembla (ball in the palace, bomb in the palace square). I may
pander to the simple tastes of theatrical critics and cook up a stage play, an oldfashioned Melodrama with three principals: a lunatic who intends to kill an imaginary
king, another lunatic who imagines himself to be that king, and a distinguished old
poet who stumbles by chance into the line of fire, and perishes in the clash between
the two figments. Oh, I may do many things! History permitting, I may sail back to
my recovered kingdom, and with a great sob greet the gray coastline and the gleam of
a roof in the rain. I may huddle and groan in a madhouse. But whatever happens,
wherever the scene is laid, somebody, somewhere, will quietly set out - somebody has
already set out, somebody still rather far away is buying a ticket, is boarding a bus, a
ship, a plane, has landed, is walking toward a million photographers, and presently he
will ring at my door - a bigger, more respectable, more competent Gradus.

