Line 12: that crystal land
Perhaps an allusion to Zembla, my dear country. After this, in the disjointed, halfobliterated draft which I am not at all sure I have deciphered properly:

Ah, I must not forget to say something
That my friend told me of a certain king.

Alas, he would have said a great deal more if a domestic anti-Karlist had not
controlled every line he communicated to her! Many a time have I rebuked him in
bantering fashion: "You really should promise to use all that wonderful stuff, you bad
gray poet, you!" And we would both giggle like boys. But then, after the inspiring
evening stroll, we had to part, and grim night lifted the drawbridge between his
impregnable fortress and my humble home.
That King's reign (1936-1958) will be remembered by at least a few discerning
historians as a peaceful and elegant one. Owing to a fluid system of judicious
alliances, Mars in his time never marred the record. Internally, until corruption,
betrayal, and Extremism penetrated it, the People's Place (parliament) worked in
perfect harmony with the Royal Council. Harmony, indeed, was the reign's password.
The polite arts and pure sciences flourished. Technicology, applied physics, industrial
chemistry and so forth were suffered to thrive. A small skyscraper of ultramarine
glass was steadily rising in Onhava. The climate seemed to be improving. Taxation
had become a thing of beauty. The poor were getting a little richer, and the rich a little
poorer (in accordance with what may be known some day as Kinbote's Law). Medical
care was spreading to the confines of the state: less and less often, on his tour of the
country, every autumn, when the rowans hung coral-heavy, and the puddles tinkled
with Muscovy glass, the friendly and eloquent monarch would be interrupted by a
pertussal "back-draucht° in a crowd of schoolchildren. Parachuting had become a
popular sport. Everybody, in a word, was content - even the political mischiefmakers
who were contentedly making mischief paid by a contented Sosed (Zembla's gigantic
neighbor). But let us not pursue this tiresome subject.
To return to the King: take for instance the question of personal culture. How often is
it that kings engage in some special research? Conchologists among them can be
counted on the fngers of one maimed hand. The last king of Zembla - partly under the
influence of his uncle Conmal, the great translator of Shakespeare (see notes to lines
39 - 40 and 962), had become, despite frequent migraines, passionately addicted to the
study of literature. At forty, not long before the collapse of his throne, he had attained
such a degree of scholarship that he dared accede to his venerable uncle's raucous
dying request: "Teach, Karlik!" Of course, it would have been unseemly for a
monarch to appear in the robes of learning at a university lectern and present to rosy
youths Finnigans Wake as a monstrous extension of Angus MacDiarmid's "incoherent
transactions" and of Southey's Lingo-Grande ("Dear Stumparumper," etc.) or discuss
the Zemblan variants, collected in 1798 by Hodinski, of the Kongs-skugg-sio (The
Royal Mirror), an anonymous masterpiece of the twelfth century. Therefore he
lectured under an assumed name and in a heavy make-up, with wig and false whiskers.
All brown-bearded, apple-checked, blue-eyed Zemblans look alike, and I who have
not shaved now for a year, resemble my disguised king (see also note to line 894).
During these periods of teaching, Charles Xavier made it a rule to sleep at a pied-àterre he had rented, as any scholarly citizen would, in Coriolanus Lane: a charming,
central-heated studio with adjacent bathroom and kitchenette. One recalls with
nostalgic pleasure its light gray carpeting and pearl-gray walls (one of them graced
with a solitary copy of Picasso's Chandelier, pot et casserole émaillée), a shelfful of
calf-bound poets, and a virginal-looking daybed under its rug of imitation panda fur.
How far from this limpid simplicity seemed the palace and the odious Council
Chamber with its unsolvable problems and frightened councilors!
