Line 130: I never bounced a ball or swung a bat
Frankly I too never excelled in soccer and cricket: I am a passable horseman, a
vigorous though unorthodox skier, a good skater, a tricky wrestler, and an enthusiastic
rock-climber.
Line 130 is followed in the draft by four verses which Shade discarded in favor of the
Fair Copy continuation (line 131 etc.). This false start goes:

As children playing in a castle find
In some old closet full of toys, behind
The animals and masks, a sliding door

[four words heavily crossed out] a secret corridor -

The comparison has remained suspended. Presumably our poet intended to attach it to
the account of his stumbling upon some mysterious truth in the fainting fits of his
boyhood. I cannot say how sorry I am that he rejected these lines. I regret it not only
because of their intrinsic beauty, which is great, but also because the image they
contain was suggested by something Shade had from me. I have already alluded in the
course of these notes to the adventures of Charles Xavier, last King of Zembla, and to
the keen interest my friend took in. the many stories I told him about that king. The
index card on which the variant has been preserved is dated July 4 and is a direct echo
of our sunset rambles in the fragrant lanes of New Wye and Dulwich. "Tell me more,"
he would say as he knocked his pipe empty against a beech trunk, and while the
colored cloud lingered, and while far away in the lighted house on the hill Mrs. Shade
sat quietly enjoying a video drama, I gladly acceded to my friend's request.
In simple words I described the curious situation in which the King found himself
during the first months of the rebellion. He had the amusing feeling of his being the
only black piece in what a composer of chess problems might term a king-in-thecorner waiter of the solus rex type. The Royalists, or at least the Moderns (Moderate
Democrats), might have still prevented the state from turning into a commonplace
modern tyranny, had they been able to cope with the tainted gold and the robot troops
that a powerful police state from its vantage ground a few sea miles away was pouring
into the Zemblan Revolution. Despite the hopelessness of the situation, the King
refused to abdicate. A haughty and morose captive, he was caged in his rose-stone
palace from a corner turret of which one could make out with the help of field glasses
lithe youths diving into the swimming pool of a fairy tale sport club, and the English
ambassador in old-fashioned flannels playing tennis with the Basque coach on a clay
court as remote as paradise. How serene were the mountains, how tenderly painted on
the western vault of the sky!
Somewhere in the mist of the city there occurred every day disgusting outbursts of
violence, arrests and executions, but the great city roiled on as smoothly as ever, the
cafes were full, splendid plays were being performed at the Royal Theater, and it was
really the palace which contained the strongest concentrate of gloom. Stone-faced,
square-shouldered komizars enforced strict discipline among the troops on duty within
and without. Puritan prudence had sealed up the wine cellars and removed all the
maid servants from the southern wing. The ladies in waiting had, of course, left long
before, at the time the King exiled his Queen to her villa on the French Riviera. Thank
heavens, she was spared those dreadful days in the polluted palace!
The door of every room was guarded. The banqueting hall had three custodians and as
many as four loafed in the library whose dark recesses seemed to harbor all the
shadows of treason. The bedrooms of the few remaining palace attendants had each its
armed parasite, drinking forbidden rum with an old footman or taking liberties with a
young page. And in the great Heralds' Hall one could always be sure of finding ribald
jokers trying to squeeze into the steel panoply of its hollow knights. And what a smell
of leather and goat in the spacious chambers once redolent of carnations and lilacs!

This tremendous company consisted of two main groups: ignorant, ferocious-looking
but really quite harmless conscripts from Thule, and taciturn, very polite Extremists
from the famous Glass Factory where the revolution had flickered first. One can now
reveal (since he is safe in Paris) that this contingent included at least one heroic
royalist so virtuosically disguised that he made his unsuspecting fellow guards look
like mediocre imitators. Actually Odon happened to be one of the most prominent
actors in Zembla and was winning applause in the Royal Theater on his off-duty
nights. Through him the King kept in touch with numerous adherents, young nobles,
artists, college athletes, gamblers, Black Rose Paladins, members of fencing clubs,
and other men of fashion and adventure. Rumors rumbled. It was said that the captive
would soon be tried by a special court; but it was also said that he would be shot while
ostensibly being transported to another place of confinement. Although flight was
discussed daily, the schemes of the conspirators had more aesthetic than practical
value. A powerful motorboat had been prepared in a coastal cave near Blawick (Blue
Cove) in western Zembla, beyond the chain of tall mountains which separated the city
from the sea; the imagined reflections of the trembling transparent water on the rock
wall and boat were tantalizing, but none of the schemers could suggest how the King
could escape from his castle and pass safely through its fortifications.
One August day, at the beginning of his third month of luxurious captivity in the
South West Tower, he was accused of using a fop's band mirror and the sun's
cooperative rays to flash signals from his lofty casement. The vastness of the view it
commanded was denounced not only as conducive to treachery but as producing in
the surveyor an airy sense of superiority over his low-lodged jailers. Accordingly, one
evening the King's cot-and-pot were transferred to a dismal lumber room on the same
side of the palace but on its first floor. Many years before, it had been the dressing
room of his grandfather, Thurgus the Third. After Thurgus died (in 1900) his ornate
bedroom was transformed into a kind of chapel and the adjacent chamber, shorn of its
full-length multiple mirror and green silk sofa, soon degenerated into what it had now
remained for half a century, an old hole of a room with a locked trunk in one corner
and an obsolete sewing machine in another. It was reached from a marble-flagged
gallery, running along its north side and sharply turning immediately west of it to
form a vestibule in the southwest corner of the Palace. The only window gave on an
inner court on the south side. This window had once been a glorious dreamway of
stained glass, with a fire-bird and a dazzled huntsman, but a football had recently
shattered the fabulous forest scene and now its new ordinary pane was barred from the
outside. On the west-side wall, above a whitewashed closet door, hung a large
photograph in a frame of black velvet. The fleeting and faint but thousands of times
repeated action of the same sun that was accused of sending messages from the tower,
had gradually patinated this picture which showed the romantic profile and broad bare
shoulders of the forgotten actress Iris Acht, said to have been for several years, ending
with her sudden death in 1888, the mistress of Thurgus. In the opposite, east-side wall
a frivolous-looking door, similar in turquoise coloration to the room's only other one
(opening into the gallery) but securely hasped, had once led to the old rake's
bedchamber; it had now lost its crystal knob, and was flanked on the east-side wall by
two banished engravings belonging to the room's period of decay. They were of the
sort that is not really supposed to be looked at, pictures that exist merely as general
notions of pictures to meet the humble ornamental needs of some corridor or waiting
room: one was a shabby and lugubrious Fête Flammande after Teniers; the other had
once hung in the nursery whose sleepy denizens had always taken it to depict foamy
waves in the foreground instead of the blurry shapes of melancholy sheep that it now
revealed.
The King sighed and began to undress. His camp bed and a bedtable had been placed,
facing the window, in the northeast corner. East was the turquoise door; north, the
door of the gallery; west, the door of the closet; south, the window. His black blazer
and white trousers were taken away by his former valet's valet. The King sat down on
the edge of the bed in his pajamas. The man returned with a pair of morocco bed
slippers, pulled them on his master's listless feet, and was off with the discarded
pumps. The King's wandering gaze stopped at the casement which was half open. One
could see part of the dimly lit court where under an enclosed poplar two soldiers on a
stone bench were playing lansquenet. The summer night was starless and stirless, with
distant spasms of silent lightning. Around the lantern that stood on the bench a batlike
moth blindly flapped - until the punter knocked it down with his cap. The King
yawned, and the illumined card players shivered and dissolved in the prism of his
tears. His bored glance traveled from wall to wall. The gallery door stood slightly ajar,
and one could hear the steps of the guard coming and going. Above the closet, Iris
Acht squared her shoulders and looked away. A cricket cricked. The bedside light was
just strong enough to put a bright gleam on the gilt key in the lock of the closet door.
And all at once that spark on that key caused a wonderful conflagration to spread in
the prisoner's mind.
We shall now go back from mid-August 1958 to a certain afternoon in May three
decades earlier when he was a dark strong lad of thirteen with a silver ring on the
forefinger of his sun-tanned hand. Queen Blenda, his mother, had recently left for
Vienna and Rome. He had several dear playmates but none could compete with Oleg,
Duke of Rahl. In those days growing boys of high-born families wore on festive
occasions-of which we had so many during our long northern spring-sleeveless
jerseys, white anklesocks with black buckle shoes, and very tight, very short shorts
called hotinguens. I wish I could provide the reader with cut-out figures and parts of
attire as given in paper-doll charts for children armed with scissors. It would brighten
a little these dark evenings that are destroying my brain. Both lads were handsome,
long-legged specimens of Varangian boyhood. At twelve, Oleg was the best center
forward at the Ducal School. When stripped and shiny in the mist of the bath house,
his bold virilia contrasted harshly with his girlish grace. He was a regular faunlet. On
that particular afternoon a copious shower lacquered the spring foliage of the palace
garden, and oh, how the Persian lilacs in riotous bloom tumbled and tossed behind the
green-streaming, amethyst-blotched windowpanes! One would have to play indoors.
Oleg was late. Would he come at all?
It occurred to the young Prince to disinter a set of precious toys (the gift of a foreign
potentate who had.recently been assassinated) which had amused Oleg and him
during a previous Easter, and then had been laid aside as happens with those special,
artistic playthings which allow iheir bubble of pleasure to yield all its tang at once
before retreating into museum oblivion. What he particularly desired to rediscover
now was an elaborate toy circus contained in a box as big as a croquet case. He craved
for it; his eyes, his brain, and that in his brain which corresponded to the ball of his
thumb, vividly remembered the brown boy acrobats with spangled nates, an elegant
and melancholy clown with a ruff, and especially three pup-sized elephants of
polished wood with such versatile joints that you could make the sleek jumbo stand
upright on one foreleg or rear up solidly on the top of a small white barrel ringed with
red. Less than a fortnight had passed since Oleg's last visit, when for the first time the
two boys had been allowed to share the same bed, and the tingle of their misbehavior,
and the foreglow of another such night, were now mixed in our young Prince with an
embarrassment that suggested refuge in earlier, more innocent games.
His English tutor who, after a picnic in Mandevil Forest, was laid up with a sprained
ankle, did not know where that circus might be; he advised looking for it in an old
lumber room at the end of the West Gallery. Thither the Prince betook himself. That
dusty black trunk? It looked grimly negative. The rain was more audible here owing
to the proximity of a prolix gutter pipe. What about the closet? Its gilt key turned
reluctantly. All three shelves and the space beneath were stuffed with disparate
objects: a palette. with the dregs of many sunsets; a cupful of counters; an ivory
backscratcher, a thirty-twomo edition of Timon of Athens translated into Zemblan by
his uncle Conmal, the Queen's brother; a seaside situla (toy pail); a sixty-five-carat
blue diamond accidentally added in his childhood, from his late father's
knickknackatory, to the pebbles and shells in that pail; a finger of chalk; and a square
board with a design of interlaced figures for some long-forgotten game. He was about
to look elsewhere in the closet when on trying to dislodge a piece of black velvet, one
corner of which had unaccountably got caught behind the shelf, something gave, the
shelf budged, proved removable, and revealed just under its farther edge, in the back
of the closet, a keyhole to which the same gilt key was found to fit.
Impatiently he cleared the other two shelves of all they held (mainly old clothes and
shoes), removed them as he had done with the middle one, and unlocked the sliding
door at the back of the closet. The elephants were forgotten, he stood on the threshold
of a secret passage. Its deep darkness was total but something about its speluncar
acoustics foretold, clearing its throat hollowly, great things, and he hurried to his own
quarters to fetch a couple of flashlights and a pedometer. As he was returning, Oleg
arrived: He carried a tulip. His soft blond locks had been cut since his last visit to the
palace, and the young Prince thought: Yes, I knew he would be different. But when
Oleg knitted his golden brows and bent close to hear about the discovery, the young
Prince knew by the downy warmth of that crimson ear and by the vivacious nod
greeting the proposed investigation, that no change had occurred in his dear bedfellow.
As soon as Monsieur Beauchamp had sat down for a game of chess at the bedside of
Mr. Campbell and had offered his raised fists to choose from, the young Prince took
Oleg to the magical closet. The wary, silent, green-carpeted steps of an escalier
dérobé: led to a stone-paved underground passage. Strictly speaking it was
"underground" only in brief spells when, after burrowing under the southwest
vestibule next to the lumber room, it went under a series of terraces, under the avenue
of birches in the royal park, and then under the three transverse streets, Academy
Boulevard, Coriolanus Lane and Timon Alley, that still separated it from its final
destination. Otherwise, in its angular and cryptic course it adapted itself to the various
structures which it followed, here availing itself of a bulwark to fit in its side like a
pencil in the pencil hold of a pocket diary, there running through the cellars of a great
mansion too rich in dark passageways to notice the stealthy intrusion. Possibly, in the
intervening years, certain arcane connections had been established between the
abandoned passage and the outer world by the random repercussions of work in
surrounding layers of masonry or by the blind pokings of time itself; for here and
there magic apertures and penetrations, so narrow and deep as to drive one insane,
could be deduced from a pool of sweet, foul ditch water, bespeaking a moat, or from a
dusky odor of earth and turf, marking the proximity of a glacis slope overhead; and at
one point, where the passage crept through the basement of a huge ducal villa, with
hothouses famous for their collections of desert flora, a light spread of sand
momentarily changed the sound of one's tread. Oleg walked in front: his shapely
buttocks encased in tight indigo cotton moved alertly, and his own erect radiance,
rather than his flambeau, seemed to illume with leaps of light the low ceiling and
crowding wails. Behind him the young Prince's electric torch played on the ground
and gave a coating of flour to the back of Oleg's bare thighs. The air was musty and
cold. On and on went the fantastic burrow. It developed a slight ascending grade. The
pedometer had tocked off 1,888 yards, when at last they reached the end. The magic
key of the lumber room closet slipped with gratifying ease into the keyhole of a green
door confronting them, and would have accomplished the act promised by its smooth
entrance, had not a burst of strange sounds coming from behind the door caused our
explorers to pause. Two terrible voices, a man's and a woman's, now rising to a
passionate pitch, now sinking to raucous undertones, were exchanging insults in
Gutnish as spoken by the fisherfolk of Western Zembla. An abominable threat made
the woman shriek out in fright. Sudden silence ensued, presently broken by the man's
murmuring some brief phrase of casual approval ("Perfect, my dear," or "Couldn't be
better") that was more eerie than anything that had come before.
Without consulting each other, the young Prince and his friend veered in absurd panic
and, with the pedometer beating wildly, raced back the way they had come. "Ouf!"
said Oleg once the last shelf had been replaced. "You're all chalky behind," said the
young Prince as they swung upstairs. They found Beauchamp and Campbell ending
their game in a draw. It was near dinner time. The two lads were told to wash their
hands. The recent thrill of adventure had been superseded already by another sort of
excitement. They locked themselves up. The tap ran unheeded. Both were in a manly
state and moaning like doves.
This detailed recollection, whose structure and maculation have taken some time to
describe in this note, skimmed through the King's memory in one instant. Certain
creatures of the past, and this was one of them, may lie dormant for thirty years as this
one had, while their natural habitat undergoes calamitous alterations. Soon after the
discovery of the secret passage he almost died of pneumonia. In his delirium he would
strive one moment to follow a luminous disk probing an endless tunnel and try the
next to clasp the melting haunches of his fair ingle. To recuperate he was sent for a
couple of seasons to southern Europe. The death of Oleg at fifteen, in a toboggan
accident, helped to obliterate the reality of their adventure. A national revolution was
needed to make that secret passage real again.
Having satisfied himself that the guard's creaky steps had moved some distance away,
the King opened the closet. It was empty now, save for the tiny volume of Timon
Afinsken still lying in one corner, and for some old sport clothes and gymnasium
shoes crammed into the bottom compartment. The footfalls were now coming back.
He did not dare pursue his examination and relocked the closet door.
It was evident he would need a few moments of perfect security to perform with a
minimum of noise a succession of small actions: enter the closet, lock it from the
inside, remove the shelves, open the secret door, replace the shelves, slip into the
yawning darkness, close the secret door and lock it. Say ninety seconds.
He stepped out into the gallery, and the guard, a rather handsome but incredibly stupid
Extremist, immediately advanced towards him. "I have a certain urgent desire," said
the King. "I want, Hal, to play the piano before going to bed." Hal (if that was his
name) led the way to the music room where, as, the King knew, Odon kept vigil over
the shrouded harp. He was a fox-browed, burly Irishman, with a pink head now
covered by the rakish cap of a Russki factory worker. The King sat down at the
Bechstein and, as soon as they were left alone, explained briefly the situation while
making tinkling notes with one hand: "Never heard of any passage," muttered Odon
with the annoyance of a chess player who is shown how he might have saved the
game he has lost. Was His Majesty absolutely sure? His Majesty was. Did he suppose
it took one out of the Palace? Definitely out of the Palace.
Anyway, Odon had to leave in a few moments, being due to act that night in The
Merman, a fine old melodrama which had not been performed, he said, for at least
three decades. "I'm quite satisfied with my own melodrama," remarked the King.
"Alas," said Odon. Furrowing his forehead, he slowly got into his leathern coat. One
could do nothing tonight. If he asked the commandant to be left on duty, it would only
provoke suspicion, and the least suspicion might be fatal. Tomorrow he would find
some opportunity to inspect that new avenue of escape, if it was that and not a dead
end. Would Charlie (His Majesty) promise not to attempt anything until then? "But
they are moving closer and closer," said the King alluding to the noise of rapping and
ripping that came from the Picture Gallery. "Not really," said Odon, "one inch per
hour, maybe two. I must be going now," he added indicating with a twitch of the
eyelid the solemn and corpulent guard who was coming to relieve him.
Under the unshakable but quite erroneous belief that the crown jewels were concealed
somewhere in the Palace, the new administration had engaged a couple of foreign
experts (see note to line 681) to locate them. The good work had been going on for a
month. The two Russians, after practically dismantling the Council Chamber and
several other rooms of state, had transferred their activities to that part of the gallery
where the huge oils of Eystein had fascinated several generations of Zemblan princes
and princesses. While unable to catch a likeness, and therefore wisely limiting himself
to a conventional style of complimentary portraiture, Eystein showed himself to be a
prodigious master of the trompe l'oeil in the depiction of various objects surrounding
his dignified dead models and making them look even deader by contrast to the fallen
petal or the polished panel that he rendered with such love and skill. But in some of
these portraits Eystein had also resorted to a weird form of trickery: among his
decorations of wood or wool, gold or velvet, he would insert one which was really
made of the material elsewhere imitated by paint. This device which was apparently
meant to enhance the effect of his tactile and tonal values had, however, something
ignoble about it and disclosed not only an essential flaw in Eystein's talent, but the
basic fact that "reality" is neither the subject nor the object of true art which creates its
own special reality having nothing to do with the average "reality" perceived by the
communal eye. But to return to our technicians whose tapping is approaching the
gallery toward the bend where the King and Odon stand ready to part. At this spot
hung a portrait representing a former Keeper of the Treasure, decrepit Count Kernel,
who was painted with fingers resting lightly on an embossed and emblazoned box
whose side facing the spectator consisted of an inset oblong made of real bronze,
while upon the shaded top of the box, drawn in perspective, the artist had pictured a
plate with the beautifully executed, twin-lobed, brainlike, halved kernel of a walnut.
"They are in for a surprise," murmured Odon in his mother tongue, while in a corner
the fat guard was going through some dutiful, rather lonesome, rifle-butt-banging
formalities.
The two Soviet professionals could be excused for assuming they would find a real
receptacle behind the real metal. At the present moment they were about to decide
whether to pry out the plaque or take down the picture; but we can anticipate a little
and assure the reader that the receptacle, an oblong hole in the wall, was there all right;
it contained nothing, however, except the broken bits of a nutshell.
Somewhere an iron curtain had gone up, baring a painted one, with nymphs and
nenuphars. "I shall bring you your flute tomorrow," cried Odon meaningfully in the
vernacular, and smiled, and waved, already bemisted, already receding into the
remoteness of his Thespian world.
The fat guard led the King back to his room and turned him over to handsome Hal. It
was half past nine. The King went to bed. The valet, a moody rascal, brought him his
usual milk and cognac nightcap and took away his slippers and dressing gown. The
man was practically out of the room when the King commanded him to put out the
light, upon which an arm re-entered and a gloved hand found and turned the switch.
Distant lightning still throbbed now and then in the window. The King finished his
drink in the dark and replaced the empty tumbler on the night table where it knocked
with a subdued ring against a steel flashlight prepared by the thoughtful authorities in
case electricity failed as it lately did now and then.
He could not sleep. Turning his head he watched the line of light under the door.
Presently it was gently opened and his handsome young jailer peeped in. A bizarre
little thought danced through the King's mind; but all the youth wanted was to warn
his prisoner that he intended to join his companions in the adjacent court, and that the
door would be locked until he returned. If, however, the ex-King needed anything, he
could call from his window. "How long will you be absent?" asked the King. "Yeg ved
ik [I know not]," answered the guard. "Good night, bad boy," said the King.
He waited for the guard's silhouette to enter the light in the courtyard where the other
Thuleans welcomed him to their game. Then, in secure darkness, the King rummaged
for some clothes on the floor of the closet and pulled on, over his pajamas, what felt
like skiing trousers and something that smelled like an old sweater. Further gropings
yielded a pair of sneakers and a woolen headgear with flaps. He then went through the
actions mentally rehearsed before. As he was removing the second shelf, an object fell
with a miniature thud; he guessed what it was and took it with him as a talisman.
He dared not press the button of his torch until properly engulfed, nor could he afford
a noisy stumble, and therefore negotiated the eighteen invisible steps in a more or less
sitting position like a timid novice bum-scraping down the lichened rocks of Mt. Kron.
The dim light he discharged at last was now his dearest companion, Oleg's ghost, the
phantom of freedom. He experienced a blend of anguish and exultation, a kind of
amorous joy, the like of which he had last known on the day of his coronation, when,
as he walked to his throne, a few bars of incredibly rich, deep, plenteous music
(whose authorship and physical source he was never able to ascertain) struck his ear,
and he inhaled the hair oil of the pretty page who had bent to brush a rose petal off the
footstool, and by the light of his torch the King now saw that he was hideously garbed
in bright red.
The secret passage seemed to have grown more squalid. The intrusion of its
surroundings was even more evident than on the day when two lads shivering in thin
jerseys and shorts had explored it. The pool of opalescent ditch water had grown in
length; along its edge walked a sick bat like a cripple with a broken umbrella. A
remembered spread of colored sand bore the thirty-year-old patterned imprint of
Oleg's shoe, as immortal as the tracks of an Egyptian child's tame gazelle made thirty
centuries ago on blue Nilotic bricks drying in the sun. And, at the spot where the
passage went through the foundations of a museum, there had somehow wandered
down, to exile and disposal, a headless statue of Mercury, conductor of souls to the
Lower World, and a cracked krater with two black figures shown dicing under a black
palm.
The last bend of the passage, ending in the green door, contained an accumulation of
loose boards across which the fugitive stepped not without stumbling. He unlocked
the door and upon pulling it open was stopped by a heavy black drapery. As he began
fumbling among its vertical folds for some sort of ingress, the weak light of his torch
rolled its hopeless eye and went out. He dropped it: it fell into muffled nothingness.
The King thrust both arms into the deep folds of the chocolate-smelling cloth and,
despite the uncertainty and the danger of the moment, was, as it were, physically.
reminded by his own movement of the comical, at first controlled, then frantic
undulations of a theatrical curtain through which a nervous actor tries vainly to pass.
This grotesque sensation, at this diabolical instant, solved the mystery of the passage
even before he wriggled at last through the drapery into the dimly lit, dimly cluttered
lumbarkamer which had once been Iris Acht's dressing room in the Royal Theater. It
still was what it had become after her death: a dusty hole of a room communicating
with a kind of hall whither performers would sometimes wander during rehearsals.
Pieces of mythological scenery leaning against the wall half concealed a large dusty
velvet-framed photograph of King Thurgus - bushy mustache, pince-nez, medals - as
he was at the time when the mile-long corridor provided an extravagant means for his
trysts with Iris.
The scarlet-clothed fugitive blinked and made for the hall. It led to a number of
dressing rooms. Somewhere beyond it a tempest of plaudits grew in volume before
petering out. Other distant sounds marked the beginning of the intermission. Several
costumed performers passed by the King, and in one of them he recognized Odon. He
was wearing a velvet jacket with brass buttons, knickerbockers and striped stockings,
the Sunday attire of Gutnish fishermen, and his fist still clutched the cardboard knife
with which he had just dispatched his sweetheart. "Good God," he said on seeing the
King.
Plucking a couple of cloaks from a heap of fantastic raiments, Odon pushed the King
toward a staircase leading to the street. Simultaneously there was a commotion among
a group of people smoking on the landing. An old intriguer who by dint of fawning on
various Extremist officials had obtained the post of Scenic Director, suddenly pointed
a vibrating finger at the King, but being afflicted with a bad stammer could not utter
the words of indignant recognition which were making his dentures clack. The King
tried to pull the front flap of his cap over his face - and almost lost his footing at the
bottom of the narrow stairs. Outside it was raining. A puddle reflected his scarlet
silhouette. Several vehicles stood in a transverse lane. It was there that Odon usually
left his racing car. For one dreadful second he thought it was gone, but then recalled
with exquisite relief that he had parked it that night in an adjacent alley. (See the
interesting note to line 149).
