Line 149: one foot upon a mountain
The Bera Range, a two-hundred-mile-long chain of rugged mountains, not quite
reaching the northern end of the Zemblan peninsula (cut off basally by an impassable
canal from the mainland of madness), divides it into two parts, the flourishing eastern
region of Onhava and other townships, such as Aros and Grindelwod, and the much
narrower western strip with its quaint fishing hamlets and pleasant beach resorts. The
two coasts are connected by two asphalted highways; the older one shirks difficulties
by running first along the eastern slopes northward to Odevalla, Yeslove and Embla,
and only then turning west at the northmost point of the peninsula; the newer one, an
elaborate, twisting, marvelously graded road, traverses the range westward from just
north of Onhava to Bregberg, and is termed in tourist booklets a "scenic drive."
Several trails cross the mountains at various points and lead to passes none of which
exceeds an altitude of five thousand feet; a few peaks rise some two thousand feet
higher and retain their snow in midsummer; and from one of them, the highest and
hardest, Mt. Glitterntin, one can distinguish on clear days, far out to the east, beyond
the Gulf of Surprise, a dim iridescence which some say is Russia.
After escaping from the theater, our friends planned to follow the old highway for
twenty miles northward, and then turn left on an unfrequented dirt road that would
have brought them eventually to the main hideout of the Karlists, a baronial castle in a
fir wood on the eastern slope of the Bera Range. But the vigilant stutterer had finally
exploded in spasmodic speech; telephones had frantically worked; and the fugitives
had hardly covered a dozen miles, when a confused blaze in the darkness before them,
at the intersection of the old and new highways, revealed a roadblock that at least had
the merit of canceling both routes at one stroke.
Odon spun the car around and at the first opportunity swerved westward into the
mountains. The narrow and bumpy lane that engulfed them passed by a woodshed,
arrived at a torrent, crossed it with a great clacking of boards, and presently
degenerated into a stump-cluttered cutting. They were at the edge of Mandevil Forest.
Thunder was rumbling in the terrible brown sky.
For a few seconds both men stood looking upward. The night and the trees concealed
the acclivity. From this point a good climber might reach Bregberg Pass by dawn - if
he managed to hit a regular trail after pushing through the black wall of the forest. It
was decided to part, Charlie proceeding toward the remote treasure in the sea cave,
and Odon remaining behind as a decoy. He would, he said, lead them a merry chase,
assume sensational disguises, and get into touch with the rest of the gang. His mother
was an American, from New Wye in New England. She is said to have been the first
woman in the world to shoot wolves, and, I believe, other animals, from an airplane.
A handshake, a flash of lightning. As the King waded into the damp, dark bracken, its
odor, its lacy resilience, and the mixture of soft growth and steep ground reminded
him of the times he had picnicked hereabouts - in another part of the forest but on the
same mountainside, and higher up, as a boy, on the boulderfield where Mr. Campbell
had once twisted an ankle and had to be carried down, smoking his pipe, by two
husky attendants. Rather full memories, on the whole. Wasn't there a hunting box
nearby - just beyond Silfhar Falls? Good capercaillie and woodcock shooting - a sport
much enjoyed by his late mother, Queen Blenda, a tweedy and horsy queen. Now as
then, the rain seethed in the black trees, and if you paused you heard your heart
thumping, and the distant roar of the torrent. What is the time, kot or? He pressed his
repeater and, undismayed, it hissed and tinkled out ten twenty-one.
Anyone who has tried to struggle up a steep slope, on a dark night, through a tangle of
inimical vegetation, knows what a formidable task our mountaineer had before him.
For more than two hours he kept at it, stumbling against stumps, falling into ravines,
clutching at invisible bushes, fighting off an army of conifers. He lost his cloak. He
wondered if he had not better curl up in the undergrowth and wait for daybreak. All at
once a pinhead light gleamed ahead and presently he found himself staggering up a
slippery, recently mown meadow. A dog barked. A stone rolled underfoot. He
realized he was near a mountainside bore (farmhouse). He also realized that he had
toppled into a deep muddy ditch.
The gnarled farmer and his, plump wife who, like personages in an old tedious tale
offered the drenched fugitive a welcome shelter, mistook him for an eccentric camper
who had got detached from his group. He was allowed to dry himself in a warm
kitchen where he was given a fairy-tale meal of bread and cheese, and a bowl of
mountain mead. His feelings (gratitude, exhaustion, pleasant warmth, drowsiness and
so on) were too obvious to need description. A fire of larch roots crackled in the stove,
and all the shadows of his lost kingdom gathered to play around his rocking chair as
he dozed off between that blaze and the tremulous light of a little earthenware cresset,
a beaked affair rather like a Roman lamp, hanging above a shelf where poor beady
baubles and bits of nacre became microscopic soldiers swarming in desperate battle.
He woke up with a crimp in the neck at the first full cowbell of dawn, found his host
outside, in a damp corner consigned to the humble needs of nature, and bade the good
grunter (mountain farmer) show him the shortest way to the pass. "I'll rouse lazy
Garh," said the farmer.
A rude staircase led up to a loft. The farmer placed his gnarled hand on the gnarled
balustrade and directed toward the upper darkness a guttural call: "Garh! Garh!"
Although given to both sexes, the name is, strictly speaking, a masculine one, and the
King expected to see emerge from the loft a bare-kneed mountain lad like a tawny
angel. Instead there appeared a disheveled young hussy wearing only a man's shirt
that came down to her pink shins and an oversized pair of brogues. A moment later, as
in a transformation act, she reappeared, her yellow hair still hanging lank and loose,
but the dirty shirt replaced by a dirty pullover, and her legs sheathed in corduroy pants.
She was told to conduct the stranger to a spot from which he could easily reach the
pass. A sleepy and sullen expression blurred whatever appeal her snub-nosed round
face might have had for the local shepherds; but she complied readily enough with her
father's wish. His wife was crooning an ancient song as she busied herself with pot
and pan.
Before leaving, the King asked his host, whose name was Griff, to accept an old gold
piece he chanced to have in his pocket, the only money he possessed. Griff vigorously
refused and, still remonstrating, started the laborious business of unlocking and
unbolting two or three heavy doors. The King glanced at the old woman, received a
wink of approval, and put the muted ducat on the mantelpiece, next to a violet
seashell against which was propped a color print representing an elegant guardsman
with his bare-shouldered wife - Karl the Beloved, as he was twenty odd years before,
and his young queen, an angry young virgin with coal-black hair and ice-blue eyes.
The stars had just faded. He followed the girl and a happy sheepdog up the overgrown
trail that glistened with the ruby dew in the theatrical light of an alpine dawn. The
very air seemed tinted and glazed. A sepulchral chill emanated from the sheer cliff
along which the trail ascended; but on the opposite precipitous side, here and there
between the tops of fir trees growing below, gossamer gleams of sunlight were
beginning to weave patterns of warmth. At the next turning this warmth enveloped the
fugitive, and a black butterfly came dancing down a pebbly rake. The path narrowed
still more and gradually deteriorated amidst a jumble of boulders. The girl pointed to
the slopes beyond it. He nodded. "Now go home," he said. "I shall rest here and then
continue alone."
He sank down on the grass near a patch of matted elfinwood and inhaled the bright air.
The panting dog lay down at his feet. Garb smiled for the first time. Zemblan
mountain girls are as a rule mere mechanisms of haphazard lust, and Garh was no
exception. As soon as she had. settled beside him, she bent over and pulled over and
off her tousled head the thick gray sweater, revealing her naked back and blancmange
breasts, and flooded her embarrassed companion with ail the acridity of ungroomed
womanhood. She was about to proceed with her stripping but he stopped her with a
gesture and got up. He thanked her for all her kindness. He patted the innocent dog;
and without turning once, with a springy step, the King started to walk up the turfy
incline.
He was still chuckling over the wench's discomfiture when he came to the tremendous
stones amassed around a small lake which he had reached once or twice from the
rocky Kronberg side many years ago. Now he glimpsed the flash of the pool through
the aperture of a natural vault, a masterpiece of erosion. The vault was low and he
bent his head to step down toward the water. In its limpid tintarron he saw his scarlet
reflection but; oddly enough, owing to what seemed to be at first blush an optical
illusion, this reflection was not at his feet but much further; moreover, it was
accompanied by the ripple-warped reflection of a ledge that jutted. high above his
present position. And finally, the strain on the magic of the image caused it to snap as
his red-sweatered, red-capped doubleganger turned and vanished, whereas he, the
observer, remained immobile. He now advanced to the very lip of the water and was
met there by a genuine reflection, much larger and clearer than the one that had
deceived him. He skirted the pool. High up in the deep-blue sky jutted the empty
ledge whereon a counterfeit king had just stood. A shiver of alfear (uncontrollable
fear caused by elves) ran between his shoulderblades. He murmured a familiar prayer,
crossed himself, and resolutely proceeded toward the pass. At a high point upon an
adjacent ridge a steinmann (a heap of stones erected as a memento of an ascent) had
donned a cap of red wool in his honor. He trudged on. But his heart was a conical
ache poking him from below in the throat, and after a while he stopped again to take
stock of conditions and decide whether to scramble up the steep debris slope in front
of him or to strike off to the right along a strip of grass, gay with gentians, that went
winding between lichened rocks. He elected the second route and in due course
reached the pass.
Great fallen crags diversified the wayside. The nippern (domed hills or "reeks") to the
south were broken by a rock and grass slope into light and shadow. Northward melted
the green, gray, bluish mountains - Falkberg with its hood of snow, Mutraberg with
the fan of its avalanche, Paberg (Mt. Peacock), and others, - separated by narrow dim
valleys with intercalated cotton-wool bits of cloud that seemed placed between the
receding sets of ridges to prevent their flanks from scraping against one another.
Beyond them, in the final blue, loomed Mt. Glitterntin, a serrated edge of bright foil;
and southward, a tender haze enveloped more distant ridges which led to one another
in an endless array, through every grade of soft evanescence.
The pass had been reached, granite and gravity had been overcome; but the most
dangerous stretch lay ahead. Westward a succession of heathered slopes led down to
the shining sea. Up to this moment the mountain had stood between him and the gulf;
now he was exposed to that arching blaze. He began the descent.
Three hours later he trod level ground. Two old women working in an orchard unbent
in slow motion and stared after him. He had passed the pine groves of Boscobel and
was approaching the quay of Blawick; when a black police car turned out on a
transverse road and pulled up next to him: "The joke has gone too far," said the driver.
"One hundred clowns are packed in Onhava jail, and the ex-King should be among
them. Our local prison is much too small for more kings. The next masquerader will
be shot at sight. What's your real name, Charlie?" "I'm British. I'm a tourist," said the
King. "Well, anyway, take off that red fufa. And the cap. Give them here." He tossed
the things in the back of the car and drove off.
The King walked on; the top of his blue pajamas tucked into his skiing pants might
easily pass for a fancy shirt. There was a pebble in his left shoe but he was too fagged
out to do anything about it.
He recognized the seashore restaurant where many years earlier he had lunched
incognito with two amusing, very amusing, sailors. Several heavily armed Extremists
were drinking beer on the geranium-lined veranda, among the routine vacationists,
some of whom were busy writing to distant friends. Through the geraniums, a gloved
hand gave the King a picture postcard on which he found scribbled: Proceed to R.C.
Bon voyage! Feigning a casual stroll, he reached the end of the embankment.
It was a lovely breezy afternoon. with a western horizon like a luminous vacuum that
sucked in one's eager heart. The King, now at the most critical point of his journey,
looked about him, scrutinizing the few promenaders and trying to decide which of
them might be police agents in disguise, ready to pounce upon him as soon as he
vaulted the parapet and made for the Rippleson Caves. Only a single sail dyed a royal
red marred with some human interest the marine expanse. Nitra and Indra (meaning
"inner" and "outer"), two black islets that seemed to address each other in cloaked
parley, were being photographed from the parapet by a Russian tourist, thickset,
many-chinned, with a general's fleshy nape. His faded wife, wrapped up floatingly in
a flowery écharpe, remarked in singsong Moscovan "Every time I see that kind of
frightful disfigurement I can't help thinking of Nina's boy. War is an awful thing."
"War?" queried her consort. "That must have been the explosion at the Glass Works
in 1951 - not war." They slowly walked past the King in the direction he had come
from. On a sidewalk bench, facing the sea, a man with his crutches beside him was
reading the Onhava Post which featured on the first page Odon in an Extremist
uniform and Odon in the part of the Merman. Incredible as it may seem the palace
guard had never realized that identity before. Now a goodly sum was offered for his
capture. Rhythmically the waves lapped the shingle. The newspaper reader's face had
been atrociously injured in the recently mentioned explosion, and all the art of plastic
surgery had only resulted in a hideous tessellated texture with parts of pattern and
parts of outline seeming to change, to fuse or to separate, like fluctuating cheeks and
chins in a distortive mirror.
The short stretch of beach between the restaurant at the beginning of the promenade
and the granite rocks at its end was almost empty: far to the left three fishermen were
loading a rowboat with kelp-brown nets, and directly under the sidewalk, an elderly
woman wearing a polka-dotted dress and having for headgear a cocked newspaper
(EX-KING SEEN - ) sat knitting on the shingle with her back to the street. Her
bandaged legs were stretched out on the sand; on one side of her lay a pair of carpet
slippers and on the other a ball of red wool, the leading filament of which she would
tug at every now and then with the immemorial elbow jerk of a Zemblan knitter to
give a turn to her yarn clew and slacken the thread. Finally, on the sidewalk a little
girl in a ballooning skirt was clumsily but energetically clattering about on roller
skates. Could a dwarf in the police force pose as a pigtailed child?
Waiting for the Russian couple to recede, the King stopped beside the bench. The
mosaic-faced man folded his newspaper, and one second before he spoke (in the
neutral interval between smoke puff and detonation). the King knew it was Odon. "All
one could do at short notice," said Odon, plucking at his cheek to display how the
varicolored semi-transparent film adhered to his face, altering its contours according
to stress. "A polite person," he added, "does not, normally, examine too closely a poor
fellow's disfigurement." "I was looking for shpiks [plainclothesmen]" said the King.
"All day," said Odon, "they have been patrolling the quay. They are dining at
present." "I'm thirsty and hungry," said the King. "That's young Baron Mandevil chap who had that duel last year. Let's go now." "Couldn't we take him too?"
"Wouldn't come - got a wife and a baby. Come on, Charlie, come on, Your Majesty."
"He was my throne page on Coronation Day." Thus chatting, they reached the
Rippleson Caves. I trust the reader has enjoyed this note.
