Line 171: a great conspiracy
For almost a whole year after the King's escape the Extremists remained convinced
that he and Odon had not left Zembla. The mistake can be only ascribed to the streak
of stupidity that fatally runs through the most competent tyranny. Airborne machines
and everything connected with them cast a veritable spell over the minds of our new
rulers whom kind history had suddenly given a boxful of these zipping and zooming
gadgets to play with. That an important fugitive would not perform by air the act of
fleeing seemed to them inconceivable. Within minutes after the King and the actor
had clattered down the backstairs of the Royal Theater, every wing in the sky and on
the ground had been accounted for - such was the efficiency of the government.
During the next weeks not one private or commercial plane was allowed to take off,
and the inspection of transients became so rigorous and lengthy that international lines
decided to cancel stopovers at Onhava. There were some casualties. A crimson
balloon was enthusiastically shot down and the aeronaut (a well-known meteorologist)
drowned in the Gulf of Surprise. A pilot from a Lapland base flying on a mission of
mercy got lost in the fog and was so badly harassed by Zemblan fighters that he
settled atop a mountain peak. Some excuse for all this could be found. The illusion of
the King's presence in the wilds of Zembla was kept up by royalist plotters who
decoyed entire regiments into searching the mountains and woods of our rugged
peninsula. The government spent a ludicrous amount of energy on solemnly screening
the hundreds of impostors packed in the country's jails. Most of them clowned their
way back to freedom; a few, alas, fell. Then, in the spring of tile following year, a
stunning piece of news came from abroad. The Zemblan actor Odon was directing the
making of a cinema picture in Paris!
It was now correctly conjectured that if Odon had fled, the King had fled too: At an
extraordinary session of the Extremist government there was passed from hand to
hand, in grim silence, a copy of a French newspaper with the headline: L'EN-ROI DE
ZEMBLA EST-IL À PARIS? Vindictive exasperation rather than state strategy
moved the secret organization of which Gradus was an obscure member to plot the
destruction of the royal fugitive. Spiteful thugs! They may be compared to hoodlums
who itch to torture the invulnerable gentleman whose testimony clapped them in
prison for life. Such convicts have been known to go berserk at the thought that their
elusive victim whose very testicles they crave to twist and tear with their talons, is
sitting at a pergola feast on a sunny island or fondling some pretty young creature
between his knees in serene security - and laughing at them! One supposes that no
hell can be worse than the helpless rage they experience as the awareness of that
implacable sweet mirth reaches them and suffuses them, slowly destroying their
brutish brains. A group of especially devout Extremists calling themselves the
Shadows had got together and swore to hunt down the King and kill him wherever he
might be. They were, in a sense, the shadow twins of the Karlists and indeed several
had cousins or even brothers among the followers of the King. No doubt, the origin of
either group could be traced to various reckless rituals in student fraternities and
military clubs, and their development examined in terms of fads and anti-fads; but,
whereas an objective historian associates a romantic and noble glamor with Karlism,
its shadow group must strike one as something definitely Gothic and nasty. The
grotesque figure of Gradus, a cross between bat and crab, was not much odder than
many other Shadows, such as, for example, Nodo, Odon's epileptic half-brother who
cheated at cards, or a mad Mandevil who had lost a leg in trying to make anti-matter.
Gradus had long been a member of all sorts of jejune leftist organizations. He had
never killed, though coming rather close to it several times in his gray life. He insisted
later that when he found himself designated to track down and murder the King, the
choice was decided by a show of cards - but let us not forget that it was Nodo who
shuffled and dealt them out. Perhaps our man's foreign origin secretly prompted a
nomination that would not cause any son of Zembla to incur the dishonor of actual
regicide. We can well imagine the scene: the ghastly neon lights of the laboratory, in
an annex of the Glass Works, where the Shadows happened to hold their meeting that
night; the ace of spades lying on the tiled floor, the vodka gulped down out of test
tubes; the many hands clapping Gradus on his round back, and the dark exultation of
the man as he received those rather treacherous congratulations. We place this fatidic
moment at 0:05, July 2, 1959 - which happens to be also the date upon which an
innocent poet penned the first lines of his last poem.

Was Gradus really a suitable person for the job? Yes and no. One day in his early
youth, when he worked as a messenger boy for a large and depressing firm of
cardboard box manufacturers, he quietly helped three companions to ambush a local
lad whom they wished to beat up for winning a motorcycle at a fair. Young Gradus
obtained an axe and directed the felling of a tree: it crashed improperly, though, not
quite blocking the country lane down which their carefree prey used to ride in the
growing dusk. The poor lad whizzing along toward the spot where those roughs
crouched was a slim delicate-looking Lorrainer, and one must have been vile indeed
to begrudge him his harmless enjoyment. Curiously enough, while they were lying in
wait, our future regicide fell asleep in a ditch and thus missed the brief affray during
which two of the attackers were knuckledusted and knocked out by the brave
Lorrainer, and the third run over and crippled for life.
Gradus never became a real success in the glass business to which he turned again and
again between his wine-selling and pamphlet-printing jobs. He started as a maker of
Cartesian devils - imps of bottle glass bobbing up and down in methylate-filled tubes
hawked during Catkin Week on the boulevards. He also worked as teazer, and later as
flasher, at governmental factories - and was, I believe, more or less responsible for the
remarkably ugly red-and-amber windows in the great public lavatory at rowdy but
colorful Kalixhaven where the sailors are. He claimed to have improved the glitter
and rattle of the so-called feuilles-d'alarme used by grape growers and orchardmen to
scare the birds. I have staggered the notes referring to him in such a fashion that the
first (see note to line 17 where some of this other activities are adumbrated) is the
vaguest while those that follow become gradually clearer as gradual Gradus
approaches in space and time.
Mere springs and coils produced the inward movements of our clockwork man. He
might be termed a Puritan. One essential dislike, formidable in its simplicity,
pervaded his dull soul: he disliked injustice and deception. He disliked their union they were always together - with a wooden passion that neither had, nor needed,
words to express itself. Such a dislike should have deserved praise had it not been a
by-product of the man's hopeless stupidity. He called unjust and deceitful everything
that surpassed his understanding. He worshiped general ideas and did so with pedantic
aplomb. The generality was godly, the specific diabolical. If one person was poor and
the other wealthy it did not matter what precisely had ruined one or made the other
rich; the difference itself was unfair, and the poor man who did not denounce it was as
wicked as the rich one who ignored it: People who knew too much, scientists, writers,
mathematicians, crystallographers and so forth, were no better than kings or priests:
they all held an unfair share of power of which others were cheated. A plain decent
fellow should constantly be on the watch for some piece of clever knavery on the part
of nature and neighbor.
The Zemblan Revolution provided Gradus with satisfactions but also produced
frustrations. One highly irritating episode seems retrospectively most significant as
belonging to an order of things that Gradus should have learned to expect but never
did. An especially brilliant impersonator of the King, the tennis ace Julius Steinmann
(son of the well-known philanthropist), had eluded for several months the police who
had been driven to the limits of exasperation by his mimicking to perfection the voice
of Charles the Beloved in a series of underground radio speeches deriding the

government. When finally captured he was tried by a special commission, of which
Gradus was a member, and condemned to death. The firing squad bungled their job,
and a little later the gallant young man was found recuperating from his wounds at a
provincial hospital. When Gradus learned of this, he flew into one of his rare rages not because the fact presupposed royalist machinations, but because the clean, honest,
orderly course of death had been interfered with in an unclean, dishonest, disorderly
manner. Without consulting anybody he rushed to the hospital, stormed in, located
Julius in a crowded ward and managed to fire twice, both times missing, before the
gun was wrested from him by a hefty male nurse. He rushed back to headquarters and
returned with a dozen soldiers but his patient had disappeared.
Such things rankle - but what can Gradus do? The huddled fates engage in a great
conspiracy against Gradus. One notes with pardonable glee that his likes are never
granted the ultimate thrill of dispatching their victim themselves. Oh, surely, Gradus
is active, capable, helpful, often indispensable. At the foot of the scaffold, on a raw
and gray morning, it is Gradus who sweeps the night's powder snow off the narrow
steps; but his long leathery face will not be the last one that the man who must mount
those steps is to see in this world. It is Gradus who buys the cheap fiber valise that a
luckier guy will plant, with a time bomb inside, under the bed of a former henchman.
Nobody knows better than Gradus how to set a trap by means of a fake advertisement,
but the rich old widow whom it hooks is courted and slain by another. When the
fallen tyrant is tied, naked and howling, to a plank in the public square and killed
piecemeal by the people who cut slices out, and eat them, and distribute his living
body among themselves (as I read when young in a story about an Italian despot,
which made of me a vegetarian for life), Gradus does not take part in the infernal
sacrament: he points out the right instrument and directs the carving.
All this is as it should be; the world needs Gradus. But Gradus should not kill kings.
Vinogradus should never, never provoke God. Leningradus should not aim his peashooter at people even in dreams, because if he does, a pair of colossally thick,
abnormally hairy arms will hug him from behind and squeeze, squeeze, squeeze.
