Line 172: books and people
In a black pocketbook that I fortunately have with me I find, jotted down, here and
there, among various extracts that had happened to please me (a footnote from
Boswell's Life of Dr. Johnson, the inscriptions on the trees in Wordsmith's famous
avenue, a quotation from St. Augustine, and so on), a few samples of John Shade's
conversation which I had collected in order to refer to them in the presence of people
whom my friendship with the poet might interest or annoy. His and my reader will, I
trust, excuse me for breaking the orderly course of these comments and letting my
illustrious friend speak for himself.
Book reviewers being mentioned, he said: "I have never acknowledged printed praise
though sometimes I longed to embrace the glowing image of this or that paragon of
discernment; and I have never bothered to lean out of my window and empty my
skoramis on some poor hack's pate. I regard both the demolishment and the rave with
like detachment." Kinbote: "I suppose you dismiss the first as the blabber of a
blockhead and the second as a kind soul's friendly act?" Shade: "Exactly."

Speaking of the Head of the bloated Russian Department, Prof. Pnin, a regular
martinet in regard to his underlings (happily, Prof. Botkin, who taught in another
department, was not subordinated to that grotesque "perfectionist"): "How odd that
Russian intellectuals should lack all sense of humor when they have such marvelous
humorists as Gogol, Dostoevski, Chekhov, Zoshchenko, and those joint authors of
genius Ilf and Petrov."
Talking of the vulgarity of a certain burly acquaintance of ours: "The man is as corny
as a cook-out chef apron." Kinbote (laughing): "Wonderful!"
The subject of teaching Shakespeare at college level having been introduced: "First of
all, dismiss ideas, and social background, and train the freshman to shiver, to get
drunk on the poetry of Hamlet or Lear, to read with his spine and not with his skull."
Kinbote: "You appreciate particularly the purple passages?" Shade: "Yes, my dear
Charles, I roll upon them as a grateful mongrel on a spot of turf fouled by a Great
Dane."
The respective impacts and penetrations of Marxism and Freudism being talked of; I
said: "The worst of two false doctrines is always that which is harder to eradicate."
Shade: "No, Charlie, there are simpler criteria: Marxism needs a dictator, and a
dictator needs a secret police, and that is the end of the world; but the Freudian, no
matter how stupid, can still cast his vote at the poll, even if he is pleased to call it
[smiling] political pollination."
Of students' papers: `"I am generally very benevolent [said Shade]. But there are
certain trifles I do not forgive." Kinbote: "For instance?" "Not having read the
required book. Having read it like an idiot. Looking in it for symbols; example: 'The
author uses the striking image green leaves because green is the symbol of happiness
and frustration.' I am also in the habit of lowering a student's mark catastrophically if
he uses 'simple' and 'sincere' in a commendatory sense; examples: 'Shelley's style is
always very simple and good'; or 'Yeats is always sincere.' This is widespread, and
when I hear a critic speaking of an author's sincerity I know that either the critic or the
author is a fool." Kinbote: "But I am told this manner of thinking is taught in high
school?" "That's where the broom should begin to sweep. A child should have thirty
specialists to teach him thirty subjects, and not one harassed schoolmarm to show him
a picture of a rice field and tell him this is China because she knows nothing about
China, or anything else, and cannot tell the difference between longitude and
latitude." Kinbote: "Yes. I agree."
