Line 17: And then the gradual; Line 29: gray
By an extraordinary coincidence (inherent perhaps in the contrapuntal nature of
Shade's art) our poet seems to name here (gradual, gray) a man, whom he was to see
for one fatal moment three weeks later, but of whose existence at the time (July 2) he
could not have known. Jakob Gradus called himself variously Jack Degree or Jacques
de Grey, or James de Gray, and also appears in police records as Ravus, Ravenstone,
and d'Argus. Having a morbid affection for the ruddy Russia of the Soviet era, he
contended that the real origin of his name should be sought in the Russian word for
grape, vinograd, to which a Latin suffix had adhered, making it Vinogradus. His
father, Martin Gradus, had been a Protestant minister in Riga, but except for him and
a maternal uncle (Roman Tselovalnikov, police officer and part-time member of the
Social-Revolutionary party), the whole clan seems to have been in the liquor business.
Martin Gradus died in 1920, and his widow moved to Strasbourg where she soon died,
too. Another Gradus, an Alsatian merchant, who oddly enough was totally unrelated
to our killer but had been a close business friend of his kinsmen for years, adopted the
boy and raised him with his own children. It would seem that at one time young
Gradus studied pharmacology in Zurich, and at another, traveled to misty vineyards as
an itinerant wine taster. We find him next engaging in petty subversive activities printing peevish pamphlets, acting as messenger for obscure syndicalist groups,
organizing strikes at glass factories, and that sort of thing. Sometime in the forties he
came to Zembla as a brandy salesman. There he married a publican's daughter. His
connection with the Extremist party dates from its first ugly writhings, and when the
revolution broke out, his modest organizational gifts found some appreciation in
various offices. His departure for Western Europe, with a sordid purpose in his heart
and a loaded gun in his pocket, took place on the very day that an innocent poet in an
innocent land was beginning Canto Two of Pale Fire. We shall accompany Gradus in
constant thought, as he makes his way from distant dim Zembla to green Appalachia,
through the entire length of the poem, following the road of its rhythm, riding past in
a rhyme, skidding around the corner of a run-on, breathing with the caesura, swinging
down to the foot of the page from line to line as from branch to branch, hiding
between two words (see note to line 596), reappearing on the horizon of a new canto,
steadily marching nearer in iambic motion, crossing streets, moving up with his valise
on the escalator of the pentameter, stepping off, boarding a new train of thought,
entering the hall of a hotel, putting out the bedlight, while Shade blots out a word, and
falling asleep as the poet lays down his pen for the night.
