Line 230: a domestic ghost
Shade's former secretary, Jane Provost, whom I recently looked up in Chicago, told
me about Hazel considerably more than her father did; he affected not to speak of his
dead daughter, and since I did not foresee this work of inquiry and comment, I did not
urge him to talk on the subject and unburden himself to me. True, in this canto he has
unburdened himself pretty thoroughly, and his picture of Hazel is quite clear and
complete; maybe a little too complete, architectonically, since the reader cannot help
feeling that it has been expanded and elaborated to the detriment of certain other
richer and rarer matters ousted by it. But a commentator's obligations cannot be
shirked, however dull the information he must collect and convey. Hence this note.
It appears that in the beginning of 1950, long before the barn incident (see note to line 347), sixteen-year-old Hazel was involved in some appalling "psychokinetic"
manifestations that lasted for nearly a month. Initially, one gathers, the poltergeist
meant to impregnate the disturbance with the identity of Aunt Maud who had just died;
the first object to perform was the basket in which she had once kept her halfparalyzed Skye terrier (the breed called in our country "weeping-willow dog"). Sybil
had had the animal destroyed soon after its mistress's hospitalization, incurring the
wrath of Hazel who was beside herself with distress. One morning this basket shot out
of the "intact" sanctuary (see lines 90-98) and traveled along the corridor past the
open door of the study, where Shade was at work; he saw it whizz by and spill its
humble contents: a ragged coverlet, a rubber bone, and a partly discolored cushion.
Next day the scene of action switched to the dining room where one of Aunt Maud's
oils (Cypress and Bat) was fond to be turned toward the wall. Other incidents
followed, such as short flights accomplished by her scrapbook (see note to line 90)
and, of course, all kinds of knockings, especially in the sanctuary, which would rouse
Hazel from her, no doubt, peaceful sleep in the adjacent bedroom. But soon the
poltergeist ran out of ideas in connection with Aunt Maud and became, as it were,
more eclectic. All the banal motions that objects are limited to in such cases, were
gone through in this one. Saucepans crashed in the kitchen; a snowball was found
(perhaps, prematurely) in the icebox; once or twice Sybil saw a plate sail by like a
discus and land safely on the sofa; lamps kept lighting up in various parts of the house;
chairs waddled away to assemble in the impassable pantry; mysterious bits of string
were found on the floor; invisible revelers staggered down the staircase in the middle
of the night; and one winter morning Shade, upon rising and taking a look at the
weather, saw that the little table from his study upon which he kept a Bible-like
Webster open at M was standing in a state of shock outdoors, on the snow
(subliminally this may have participated in the making of lines 5-12).
I imagine, that during that period the Shades, or at least John Shade, experienced a
sensation of odd instability as if parts of the everyday, smoothly running world had
got unscrewed, and you became aware that one of your tires was rolling beside you,
or that your steering wheel had come off, My poor friend could not help recalling the
dramatic fits of his early boyhood and wondering if this was not a new genetic variant
of the same theme, preserved through procreation. Trying to hide from neighbors
these horrible and humiliating phenomena was not the least of Shade's worries. He
was terrified, and he was lacerated with pity. Although never able to corner her, that
flabby, feeble, clumsy and solemn girl, who seemed more interested than frightened,
he and Sybil never doubted that in some extraordinary way she was the agent of the
disturbance which they saw as representing (I now quote Jane P.) "an outward
extension or expulsion of insanity." They could not do much about it, partly because
they disliked modern voodoo-psychiatry, but mainly because they were afraid of
Hazel, and afraid to hurt her. They had however a secret interview with old-fashioned
and learned Dr. Sutton, and this put them in better spirits. They were contemplating
moving into another house or, more exactly, loudly saying to each other, so as to be
overheard by anyone who might be listening, that they were contemplating moving,
when all at once the fiend was gone, as happens with the moskovett, that bitter blast,
that colossus of cold air that blows on our eastern shores throughout March, and then
one morning you hear the birds, and the flags hang flaccid, and the outlines of the
world are again in place. The phenomena ceased completely and were, if not forgotten,
at least never referred to; but how curious it is that we do not perceive a mysterious
sign of equation between the Hercules springing forth from a neurotic child's weak
frame and the boisterous ghost of Aunt Maud; how curious that our rationality feels
satisfied when we plump for the first explanation, though, actually, the scientific and
the supernatural, the miracle of the muscle and the miracle of the mind, are both
inexplicable as are all the ways of Our Lord.
