Line 238: empty emerald case
This, I understand, is the semitransparent envelope left on a tree trunk by an adult
cicada that has crawled up the trunk and emerged. Shade said that he had once
questioned a class of three hundred students and only three knew what a cicada
looked like. Ignorant settlers had dubbed it "locust," which is, of course, a
grasshopper, and the same absurd mistake has been made by generations of translators
of Lafontaine's La Cigale et la Fourmi (see lines 243-244). The cigale's companion
piece, the ant, is about to be embalmed in amber.
During our sunset rambles, of which there were so many, at least nine (according to
my notes) in June, but dwindling to two in the first three weeks of July (they shall be
resumed Elsewhere!), my friend had a rather coquettish way of pointing out with the
tip of his cane various curious natural objects. He never tired of illustrating by means
of these examples the extraordinary blend of Canadian Zone and Austral Zone that
"obtained," as he put it; in that particular spot of Appalachia where at our altitude of
about 1,500 feet northern species of birds, insects and plants commingled with
southern representatives. As most literary celebrities, Shade did not seem to realize
that a humble admirer who has cornered at last and has at last to himself the
inaccessible man of genius, is considerably more interested in discussing with him
literature and life than in being told that the "diana" (presumably a flower) occurs in
New Wye together with the "atlantis" (presumably another flower), and things of that
sort. I particularly remember one exasperating evening stroll (July 6) which my poet
granted me, with majestic generosity, in compensation for a bad hurt (see, frequently see note to line 181), in recompense for my small gift (which I do not think he ever
used), and with the sanction of his wife who made it a point to accompany us part of
the way to Dulwich Forest. By means of astute excursions into natural history Shade
kept evading me, me, who was, hysterically, intensely, uncontrollably curious to
know what portion exactly of the Zemblan-king's adventures he had completed in the
course of the last four or five days. My usual shortcoming, pride, prevented me from
pressing him with direct questions but I kept reverting to my own earlier themes - the
escape from the palace, the adventures in the mountains - in order to force some
confession from him. One would imagine that a poet, in the course of composing a
long and difficult piece, would simply jump at the opportunity of talking about his
triumphs and tribulations. But nothing of the sort! All I got in reply to my infinitely
gentle and cautious interrogations were such phrases as: "Yep. It's coming along
nicely," or "Nope, I'm not talkin'," and finally he brushed me off with a rather
offensive anecdote about King Alfred who, it was said; liked the stories of a
Norwegian attendant he had but drove him away when engaged in other business: "Oh,
there you are," rude Alfred would say to the gentle Norwegian who had come to
weave a subtly different variant of some old Norse myth he had already related before:
"Oh there you are again!" And thus it came to pass, my dears, that a fabulous exile, a
God-inspired northern bard, is known today to English schoolboys by the trivial
nickname: Ohthere.
However! On a later occasion my capricious and henpecked friend was much kinder
(see note to line 802).
