Line 286: A jet's pink trail above the sunset fire
I, too, was wont to draw my poet's attention to the idyllic beauty of airplanes in the
evening sky. Who could have guessed that on the very day (July 7) Shade penned this
lambent line (the last one on his twenty-third card) Gradus, alias Degré, had flown
from Copenhagen to Paris, thus completing the second lap of his sinister journey!
Even in Arcady am I, says Death in the tombal scripture.
The activities of Gradus in Paris had been rather neatly planned by the Shadows. They
were perfectly right in assuming that not only Odon but our former consul in Paris,
the late Oswin Bretwit, would know where to find the King. They decided to have
Gradus try Bretwit first. That gentleman had a flat in Meudon where he dwelt alone,
seldom going anywhere except the National Library (where he read theosophic works
and solved chess problems in old newspapers), and did not receive visitors. The
Shadows' neat plan sprung from a piece of luck. Suspecting that Gradus lacked the
mental equipment and mimic gifts necessary for the impersonation of an enthusiastic
Royalist, they suggested he had better pose as a completely apolitical commissioner, a
neutral little man interested only in getting a good price for various papers that private
parties had asked him to take out of Zembla and deliver to their rightful owners.
Chance, in one of its anti-Karlist moods, helped. One of the lesser Shadows whom we
shall call Baron A. had a father-in-law called Baron B., a harmless old codger long
retired from the civil service and quite incapable of understanding certain Renaissance
aspects of the new regime. He had been, or thought he had been (retrospective
distance magnifies things), a close friend of the late Minister of Foreign Affairs;
Oswin Bretwit's father, and therefore was looking forward to the day when he would
be able to transmit to "young" Oswin (who, he understood, was not exactly persona
grata with the new regime) a bundle of precious family papers that the dusty baron
had come across by chance in the files of a governmental office. All at once he was
informed that now the day had come: the documents would be immediately forwarded
to Paris. He was also allowed to prefix a brief note to them which read:
Here are some precious papers belonging to your family. I cannot do better than place
them in the hands of the son of the great man who was my fellow student in
Heidelberg and my teacher in the diplomatic service. Verba volant, scripta manent.
The scripta in question were two hundred and thirteen long letters which had passed
some seventy years ago between Zule Bretwit, Oswin's grand-uncle, Mayor of
Odevalla, and a cousin of his, Ferz Bretwit, Mayor of Aros. This correspondence, a
dismal exchange of bureaucratic platitudes and fustian jokes, was devoid of even such
parochial interest as letters of this sort may possess in the eyes of a local historian but of course there is no way of telling what will repel or attract a sentimental
ancestralist - and this was what Oswin Bretwit had always been known to be by his
former staff. I would like to take time out here to interrupt this dry commentary and
pay a brief tribute to Oswin Bretwit.
Physically, he was a sickly bald-headed man resembling a pallid gland. His face was
singularly featureless. He had café-au-lait eyes. One remembers him always as
wearing a mourning band. But this insipid exterior belied the quality of the man. From
beyond the shining corrugations of the ocean I salute here brave Bretwit! Let there
appear for a moment his hand and mine firmly clasping each other across the water
over the golden wake of an emblematic sun. Let no insurance firm or airline use this
insigne on the glossy page of a magazine as an ad badge under the picture of a retired
businessman stupefied and honored by the sight of the technicolored snack that the air
hostess offers him with everything else she can give; rather, let this lofty handshake
be regarded in our cynical age of frenzied heterosexualism as a last, but lasting,
symbol of valor and self-abnegation. How fervently one had dreamed that a similar
symbol but in verbal form might have imbued the poem of another dead friend; but
this was not to be... Vainly does one look in Pale Fire (oh, pale, indeed!) for the
warmth of my hand gripping yours, poor Shade!
But to return to the roofs of Paris. Courage was allied in Oswin Bretwit with integrity,
kindness, dignity, and what can be euphemistically called endearing naïveté. When
Gradus telephoned from the airport, and to whet his appetite read to him Baron B.'s
message (minus the Latin tag), Bretwit's only drought was for the treat in store for
him. Gradus had declined to say over the telephone what exactly the "precious
papers" were, but it so happened that the ex-consul had been hoping lately to retrieve
a valuable stamp collection that his father had bequeathed years ago to a now defunct
cousin. The cousin had dwelt in the same house as Baron B., and with all these
complicated and entrancing matters uppermost in his mind, the ex-consul, while
awaiting his visitor, kept wondering not if the person from Zembla was a dangerous
fraud, but whether he would bring all the albums at once or would do it gradually so
as to see what he might get for his pains. Bretwit hoped the business would be
completed that very night since on the following morning he was to be hospitalized
and possibly operated upon (he was, and died under the knife).
If two secret agents belonging to rival factions meet in a battle of wits, and if one has
none, the effect may be droll; it is dull if both are dolts. I defy anybody to find in the
annals of plot and counterplot anything more inept and boring than the scene that
occupies the rest of this conscientious note.
Gradus sat down, uncomfortably, on the edge of a sofa (upon which a tired king had
reclined less than a year ago), dipped into his briefcase, handed to his host a bulky
brown paper parcel and transferred his haunches to a chair near Bretwit's seat in order
to watch in comfort his tussle with the string. In stunned silence Bretwit stared at what
he finally unwrapped, and then said:
"Well, that's the end of a dream. This correspondence has been published in 1906 or
1907 - no; 1906, after all - by Ferz Bretwit's widow - I may even have a copy of it
somewhere among my books. Moreover, this is not a holograph but an apograph,
made by a scribe for the printers - you will note that both mayors write the same
hand."
"How interesting," said Gradus noting it.
"Naturally I appreciate the kind thought behind it," said Bretwit.
"We were sure you would," said pleased Gradus.
"Baron B. must be a little gaga," continued Bretwit, "but I repeat, his kind intention is
touching. I suppose you want some money for bringing this treasure?"
"The pleasure it gives you should be our reward." answered Gradus. "But let me tell
you frankly: we took a lot of pains in trying to do this properly, and I have come
along way. However, I want to offer you a little arrangement. You be nice to us and
we'll be nice to you. I know your funds are somewhat -"
(Small-fish gesture and wink).
"True enough," sighed Bretwit.
"If you go along with us it won't cost you a centime."
"Oh, I could pay something" (Pout and shrug).
"We don't need your money" (Traffic-stopper's palm). "But here's our plan. I have
messages from other barons for other fugitives. In fact, I have letters for the most
mysterious fugitive of all."
"What!" cried Bretwit in candid surprise. "They know at home that His Majesty has
left Zembla?" (I could have spanked the dear man.)
"Indeed, yes," said Gradus kneading his hands, and fairly panting with animal
pleasure - a matter of instinct no doubt since the man certainly could not realize
intelligently that the ex-consul's faux pas was nothing less than the first confirmation
of the Kings presence abroad: "Indeed," he repeated with a meaningful leer, "and I
would be deeply obliged to you if you would recommend me to Mr. X."
At these words a false truth dawned upon Oswin Bretwit and he moaned to himself:
Of course! How obtuse of me! He is one of us! The fingers of his left hand
involuntarily started to twitch as if he were pulling a kikapoo puppet over it, while his
eyes followed intently his interlocutor's low-class gesture of satisfaction. A Karlist
agent, revealing himself to a superior, was expected to make a sign corresponding to
the X (for Xavier) in the one-hand alphabet of deaf mutes: the hand held in horizontal
position with the index curved rather flaccidly and the rest of the fingers bunched
(many have criticized it for looking too droopy; it has now been replaced by a more
virile combination). On the several occasions Bretwit had been given it, the
manifestation had been preceded for him, during a moment of suspense - rather a gap
in the texture of time than an actual delay - by something similar to what physicians
call the aura, a strange sensation both tense and vaporous, a hot-cold ineffable
exasperation pervading the entire nervous system before a seizure. And on this
occasion too Bretwit felt the magic wine rise to his head.
"All right, I am ready. Give me the sign," he avidly said.
Gradus, deciding to risk it, glanced at the hand in Bretwit's lap: unperceived by its
owner, it seemed to be prompting Gradus in a manual whisper. He tried to copy what
it was doing its best to convey - mere rudiments of the required sign.
"No, no," said Bretwit with an indulgent smile for the awkward novice. "The other
hand, my friend. His Majesty is left-handed, you know."
Gradus tried again - but, like an expelled puppet, the wild little prompter had
disappeared. Sheepishly contemplating his five stubby strangers, Gradus went through
the motions of an incompetent and half-paralyzed shadowgrapher and finally made an
uncertain V-for-Victory sign. Bretwit's smile began to fade.
His smile gone, Bretwit (the name means Chess Intelligence) got up from his chair. In
a larger room he would have paced up and down - not in this cluttered study. Gradus
the Bungler buttoned all three buttons of his tight brown coat and shook his head
several times.
"I think," he said crossly, "one must be fair. If I bring you these valuable papers, you
must in return arrange an interview, or at least give me his address."
"I know who you are," cried Bretwit pointing. "You're a reporter! You are from the
cheap Danish paper sticking out of your pocket" (Gradus mechanically fumbled at it
and frowned). "I had hoped they had given up pestering me! The vulgar nuisance of it!
Nothing is sacred to you, neither cancer, nor exile, nor the pride of a king" (alas, this
is true not only of Gradus - he has colleagues in Arcady too).
Gradus sat staring at his new shoes - mahogany red with sieve-pitted caps. An
ambulance screamed its impatient way through dark streets three stories below.
Bretwit vented his irritation on the ancestral letters lying on the table. He snatched up
the neat pile with its detached wrapping and flung it all in the wastepaper basket. The
string dropped outside, at the feet of Gradus who picked it up and added it to the
scripta.
"Please, go," said poor Bretwit. "I have a pain in my groin that is driving me mad. I
have not slept for three nights. You journalists are an obstinate bunch but I am
obstinate too. You will never learn from me anything about my kind. Good-bye."
He waited on the landing for his visitor's steps to go down and reach the front door. It
was opened and closed, and presently the automatic light on the stairs went out with
the sound of a kick.
