Line 287: humming as you pack
The card (his twenty-fourth) with this passage (lines 287-299) is marked July 7th, and
under that date in my little agenda I find this scribble: DR. AHLERT, 3:00 P.M.
Feeling a bit nervous, as most people do at the prospect of seeing a doctor, I thought I
would buy on my way to him something soothing - to prevent an accelerated pulse
from misleading credulous science. I found the drops I wanted, took the aromatic
draught in the pharmacy, and was coming out when I noticed the Shades leaving a
shop next door. She was carrying a new traveling grip. The dreadful thought that they
might be going away on a summer vacation neutralized the medicine I had just
swallowed. One gets so accustomed to another life's running alongside one's own that
a sudden turn-off on the part of the parallel satellite causes in one a feeling of
stupefaction, emptiness, and injustice. And what is more he had not yet finished "my"
poem!
"Planning to travel?" I asked, smiling and pointing at the bag.
Sybil raised it by the ears like a rabbit and considered it with my eyes.
"Yes, at the end of the month," she said. "After John is through with his work."
(The poem!)
"And where, pray?" (turning to John):
Mr. Shade glanced at Mrs. Shade, and she replied for him in her usual brisk offhand
fashion that they did not know for sure yet - it might be Wyoming or Utah or Montana
and perhaps they would rent somewhere a cabin at 6,000 or 7,000 feet.
"Among the lupines and the aspens," said the poet gravely. (Conjuring up the scene.)
I started to calculate aloud in meters the altitude that I thought much too high for
John's heart but Sybil pulled him by the sleeve reminding him they had more
shopping to do, and I was left with about 2,000 meters and a valerian-flavored burp.
But occasionally black-winged fate can display exquisite thoughtfulness! Ten minutes
later Dr. A. - who treated Shade, too - was telling me in stolid detail that the Shades
had rented a little ranch some friends of theirs, who were going elsewhere, had at
Cedarn in Utana on the Idoming border. From the doctor's I flitted over to a travel
agency, obtained maps and booklets, studied them, learned that on the mountainside
above Cedarn there were two or three clusters of cabins, rushed my order to the
Cedarn Post Office, and a few days later had rented for the month of August what
looked in the snapshots they sent me like a cross between a mujik's izba and Refuge Z,
but it had a tiled bathroom and cost dearer than my Appalachian castle. Neither the
Shades nor I breathed a word about our summer address but I knew, and they did not,
that it was the same. The more I fumed at Sybil's evident intention to keep it
concealed from me, the sweeter was the forevision of my sudden emergence in
Tirolese garb from behind a boulder and of John's sheepish but pleased grin. During
the fortnight that I had my demons fill my goetic mirror to overflow with those pink
and mauve cliffs and black junipers and winding roads and sage brush changing to
grass and lush blue flowers, and death-pale aspens, and an endless sequence of greenshorted Kinbotes meeting an anthology of poets and a brocken of their wives, I must
have made some awful mistake in my incantations, for the mountain slope is dry and
drear, and the Hurleys' tumble-down ranch, lifeless.
