Line 408: A male hand
On July 10, the day John Shade wrote this, and perhaps at the very minute he started
to use his thirty-third index card for lines 406-416, Gradus was driving in a hired car
from Geneva to Lex, where Odon was known to be resting, after completing his
motion picture, at the villa of an old American friend, Joseph S. Lavender (the name
hails from the laundry, not from the laund). Our brilliant schemer had been told that
Joe Lavender collected photographs of the artistic type called in French ombrioles. He
had not been told what exactly these were and dismissed them mentally as
"lampshades with landscapes." His cretinous plan was to present himself as the agent
of a Strasbourg art dealer and then, over drinks with Lavender and his house guest,
endeavor to pick up clues to the King's whereabouts. He did not reckon with the fact
that Donald Odon with his absolute sense of such things would have immediately
deduced from the way Gradus displayed his empty palm before shaking hands or
made a slight bow after every sip, and other tricks of demeanor (which Gradus
himself did not notice in people but had acquired from them) that wherever he had
been born he had certainly lived for a considerable time in a low-class Zemblan
environment and was therefore a spy or worse. Gradus was also unaware that the
ombrioles Lavender collected (and I am sure Joe will not resent this indiscretion)
combined exquisite beauty with highly indecent subject matter - nudities blending
with fig trees, oversize ardors, softly shaded hinder cheeks, and also a dapple of
female charms.
From his Geneva hotel Gradus had tried to get Lavender on the telephone but was told
he could not be reached before noon. By noon Gradus was already under way and
telephoned again, this time from Montreux. Lavender had been given the message and
would Mr. Degré drop in around tea time. He luncheoned in a lakeside cafe, went for
a stroll, asked the price of a small crystal giraffe in a souvenir shop, bought a
newspaper, read it on a bench, and presently drove on. In the vicinity of Lex he lost
his way among steep tortuous lanes. Upon stopping above a vineyard, at the rough
entrance of an unfinished house, he was shown by the three index fingers of three
masons the red roof of Lavender's villa high up in the ascending greenery on the
opposite side of the road. He decided to leave the car and climb the stone steps of
what looked like an easy short cut. While he was trudging up the walled walk with his
eye on the rabbit foot of a poplar which now hid the red roof at the top of the climb,
now disclosed it, the sun found a weak spot among the rain clouds and next moment a
ragged blue hole in them grew a radiant rim. He felt the burden and the odor of his
new brown suit bought in a Copenhagen store and already wrinkled. Puffing,
consulting his wrist watch, and fanning himself with his trilby, also new, he reached
at last the transverse continuation of the looping road he had left below. He crossed it,
walked through a wicket and up a curving gravel path, and found himself in front of
Lavender's villa. Its name, Libitina, was displayed in cursive script above one of the
barred north windows, with its letters made of black wire and the dot over each of the
three i's cleverly mimicked by the tarred head of a chalk-coated nail driven into the
white facade. This device, and the north-facing window grates, Gradus had observed
in Swiss villas before, but immunity to classical allusion deprived him of the pleasure.
he might have derived from the tribute that Lavender's macabre joviality had paid the
Roman goddess of corpses and tombs. Another matter engaged his attention: from a
corner casement came the sounds of a piano, a tumult of vigorous music which for
some odd reason, as he was to tell me later, suggested to him a possibility he had not
considered and caused his hand to fly to his hip pocket as he prepared to meet not
Lavender and not Odon but that gifted hymnist, Charles the Beloved. The music
stopped as Gradus, confused by the whimsical shape of the house, hesitated before a
glassed-in porch. An elderly footman in green appeared from a green side door and
led him to another entrance. With a show of carelessness not improved by laborious
repetition, Gradus asked him, first in mediocre French, then in worse English, and
finally in fair German, if there were many guests staying in the house; but the man
only smiled and bowed him into the music room. The musician had vanished. A
harplike din still carve from the grand piano upon which a pair of beach sandals stood
as on the brink of a lily pond. From a window seat a gaunt jet-glittering lady stiffly
arose and introduced herself as the governess of Mr. Lavender's nephew. Gradus
mentioned his eagerness to see Lavender's sensational collection: this aptly defined its
pictures of lovemaking in orchards, but the governess (whom the King had always
called to her pleased face Mademoiselle Belle instead of Mademoiselle Baud)
hastened to confess her total ignorance of her employer's hobbies and treasures and
suggested the visitor's taking a look at the garden: "Gordon will show you his favorite
flowers" she said, and called into the next room "Gordon!" Rather reluctantly there
came out a slender but strong-looking lad of fourteen or fifteen dyed a nectarine hue
by the sun. He had nothing on save a leopard-spotted loincloth. His closely cropped
hair was a tint lighter than his skin: His lovely bestial face wore an expression both
sullen and sly. Our preoccupied plotter did not register any of these details and merely
experienced a general impression of indecency. "Gordon is a musical prodigy," said
Miss Baud, and the boy winced. "Gordon, will you show the garden to this
gentleman?" The boy acquiesced, adding he would take a dip if nobody minded. He
put on his sandals and led the way out. Through light and shade walked the strange
pair: the graceful boy wreathed about the loins with ivy and the seedy killer in his
cheap brown suit with a folded newspaper sticking out of his left-hand coat pocket.
"That's the Grotto," said Gordon. "I once spent the night here with a friend." Gradus
let his indifferent glance enter the mossy recess where one could glimpse a collapsible
mattress with a dark stain on its orange nylon. The boy applied avid lips to a pipe of
spring water and wiped his wet hands on his black bathing trunks. Gradus consulted
his watch. They strolled on. "You have not seen anything yet," said Gordon.
Although the house possessed at least half-a-dozen water closets, Mr. Lavender in
fond memory of his grandfather's Delaware farm, had installed a rustic privy under
the tallest poplar of his splendid garden, and for chosen guests, whose sense of humor
could stand it, he would unhook from the comfortable neighborhood of the billiard
room fireplace a heart-shaped, prettily embroidered bolster to take with them to the
throne.
The door was open and across its inner side a boy's hand had scrawled in charcoal:
The King was here.
"That's a fine visiting card," remarked Gradus with a forced laugh. "By the way,
where is he now, that king?"
"Who knows," said the boy striking his flanks clothed in white tennis shorts, "that was
last year. I guess he was heading for the Côte d'Azur, but I am not sure."
Dear Gordon lied, which was nice of him. He knew perfectly well that his big friend
was no longer in Europe; but dear Gordon should not have brought up the Riviera
matter which happened to be true and the mention of which caused Gradus, who knew
that Queen Disa had a palazzo there, to mentally slap his brow.
They had now reached the swimming pool. Gradus, in deep thought, sank down on a
canvas stool. He should wire headquarters at once. No need to prolong this visit. On
the other hand, a sudden departure might look suspicious. The stool creaked under
him and he looked around for aaother seat. The young woodwose had now closed his
eyes and was stretched out supine on the pool's marble margin; his Tarzan brief had
been cast aside on the turf. Gradus spat in disgust and walked back towards the house.
Simultaneously the elderly footman came running down the steps of the terrace to tell
him in three languages that he was wanted on the telephone. Mr. Lavender could not
make it after all but would like to talk to Mr. Degré. After an exchange of civilities
there was a pause and Lavender asked: "Sure you aren't a mucking snooper from that
French rag?" "A what?" said Gradus, pronouncing the last word as "vot." "A mucking
snooping son of a bitch?" Gradus hung up.
He retrieved his car and drove up to a higher level on the hillside. From the same road
bay, on a misty and luminous September day, with the diagonal of the first silver
filament crossing the space between two balusters, the King had surveyed the
twinkling ripples of Lake Geneva and had noted their antiphonal response, the
flashing of tinfoil scares in the hillside vineyards. Gradus as he stood there, and
moodily looked down at the red tiles of Lavender's villa snuggling among its
protective trees, could make out, with some help from his betters, a part of the lawn
and a segment of the pool, and even distinguish a pair of sandals on its marble rim all that remained of Narcissus. One assumes he wondered if he should not hang
around for a bit to make sure he had not been bamboozled. From far below mounted
the clink and tinkle of distant masonry work, and a sudden train passed between
gardens, and a heraldic butterfly volant en arrière, sable, a bend gules, traversed the
stone parapet, and John Shade took a fresh card.
