Line 42: I could make out
By the end of May I could make out the outlines of some of my images in the shape
his genius might give them; by mid-June I felt sure at last that he would recreate in a
poem the dazzling Zembla burning in my brain. I mesmerized him with it, I saturated
him with my vision, I pressed upon him, with a drunkard's wild generosity, all that I
was helpless myself to put into verse. Surely, it would not be easy to discover in the
history of poetry a similar case - that of two men, different in origin, upbringing,
thought associations, spiritual intonation and mental mode, one a cosmopolitan
scholar, the other a fireside poet, entering into a secret compact of this kind. At length
I knew he was ripe with my Zembla, bursting with suitable rhymes, ready to spurt at
the brush of an eyelash. I kept urging him at every opportunity to surmount his
habitual sloth and start writing. My little pocket diary contains such jottings as:
"Suggested to him the heroic measure"; "retold the escape"; "offered the use of a quiet
room in my house"; "discussed making recordings of my voice for his use"; and
finally, under date of July 3: "poem begun!"
Although I realize only too clearly, alas, that the result, in its pale and diaphanous
final phase, cannot be regarded as a direct echo of my narrative (of which,
incidentally, only a few fragments are given in my notes - mainly to Canto One), one
can hardly doubt that the sunset glow of the story acted as a catalytic agent upon the
very process of the sustained creative effervescence that enabled Shade to produce a
1000-line poem in three weeks. There is, moreover, a symptomatic family
resemblance in the coloration of both poem and story. I have reread, not without
pleasure, my comments to his lines, and in many cases have caught myself borrowing
a kind of opalescent light from my poet's fiery orb, and unconsciously aping the prose
style of his own critical essays. But his widow, and his colleagues, may stop worrying
and enjoy in full the fruit of whatever advice they gave my good-natured poet. Oh yes,
the final text of the poem is entirely his.
If we discount, as I think we should, three casual allusions to royalty (605, 822, and
894) and the Popian "Zembla" in line 937, we may conclude that the final text of Pale
Fire has been deliberately and drastically drained of every trace of the material I
contributed; but we also find that despite the control exercised upon my poet by a
domestic censor and God knows whom else, he has given the royal fugitive a refuge
in the vaults of the variants he has preserved; for in his draft as many as thirteen
verses, superb singing verses (given by me in note to lines 70, 79, and 130, all in
Canto One, which he obviously worked at with a greater degree of creative freedom
than he enjoyed afterwards) bear the specific imprint of my theme, a minute but
genuine star ghost of my discourse on Zembla and her unfortunate king.
