Lines 433-434: To the ... sea Which we had visited in thirty-three
In 1933, Prince Charles was eighteen and Disa, Duchess of Payn, five. The allusion is
to Nice (see also line 240) where the Shades spent the first part of that year; but here
again, as in regard to so many fascinating facets of my friend's past life, I am not in
the possession of particulars (who is to blame, dear S.S.?) and not in the position to
say whether or not, in the course of possible excursions along the coast, they ever
reached Cap Turc and glimpsed from an oleander-lined lane, usually open to tourists,
the Italianate villa built by Queen Disa's grandfather in 1908; and called then Villa
Paradiso, or in Zemblan Villa Paradisa, later to forego the first half of its name in
honor of his favorite granddaughter. There she spent the first fifteen summers of her
life; thither did she return in 1953, "for reasons of health" (as impressed on the nation)
but really, a banished queen; and there she still dwells.
When the Zemblan Revolution broke out (May 1, 1958), she wrote the King a wild
letter in governess English, urging him to come and stay with her until the situation
cleared up. The letter was intercepted by the Onhava police, translated into crude
Zemblan by a Hindu member of the Extremist party, and then read aloud to the royal
captive in a would-be ironic voice by the preposterous commandant of the palace.
There happened to be in that letter one - only one, thank God - sentimental sentence:
"I want you to know that no matter how much you hurt me, you cannot hurt my love,"
and this sentence (if we re-English it from the Zemblan) came out as: "I desire you
and love when you flog me" He interrupted the commandant, calling him a buffoon
and a rogue, and insulting everybody around so dreadfully that the Extremists had to
decide fast whether to shoot him at once or let him have the original of the letter.
Eventually he managed to inform her that he was confined to the palace. Valiant Disa
hurriedly left the Riviera and made a romantic but fortunately ineffectual attempt to
return to Zembla. Had she been permitted to land, she would have been forthwith
incarcerated, which would have reacted on the King's flight, doubling the difficulties
of escape. A message from the Karlists containing these simple considerations
checked her progress in Stockholm, and she flew back to her perch in a mood of
frustration and fury (mainly, I think, because the message had been conveyed to her
by a cousin of hers, good old Curdy Buff, whom she loathed). Several weeks passed
and she was soon in a state of even worse agitation owing to rumors that her husband
might be condemned to death. She left Cap Turc again. She had traveled to Brussels
and chartered a plane to fly north, when another message, this time from Odon, came,
saying that the King and he were out of Zembla, and that she should quietly regain
Villa Disa and await there further news. In the autumn of the same year she was
informed by Lavender that a man representing her husband would be coining to
discuss with her certain business matters concerning property she and her husband
jointly owned abroad. She was in the act of writing on the terrace under the jacaranda
a disconsolate letter to Lavender when the tall, sheared and bearded visitor with the
bouquet of flowers-of-the-gods who had been watching her from afar advanced
through the garlands of shade. She looked up - and of course no dark spectacles and
no make-up could for a moment fool her.
Since her final departure from Zembla he had visited her twice, the last time two years
before; and during that lapse of time her pale-skin, dark-hair beauty had acquired a
new, mature and melancholy glow. In Zembla, where most females are freckled
blondes, we have the saying: belwif ivurkumpf wid spew ebanumf, "A beautiful
woman should be like a compass rose of ivory with four parts of ebony." And this was
the trim scheme nature had followed in Disa's case. There was something else,
something I was to realize only when I read Pale Fire, or rather reread it after the first
bitter hot mist of disappointment had cleared before my eyes. I am thinking of lines
261-267 in which Shade describes his wife. At the moment of his painting that
poetical portrait, the sitter was twice the age of Queen Disa. I do not wish to be vulgar
in dealing with these delicate matters but the fact remains that sixty-year-old Shade is
lending here a well-conserved coeval the ethereal and eternal aspect she retains, or
should retain, in his kind noble heart. Now the curious thing about it is that Disa at
thirty, when last seen in September 1958, bore a singular resemblance not, of course,
to Mrs. Shade as she was when I met her, but to the idealized and stylized picture
painted by the poet in those lines of Pale Fire. Actually it was idealized and stylized
only in regard to the older woman; in regard to Queen Disa, as she was that afternoon
on that blue terrace, it represented a plain unretouched likeness. I trust the reader
appreciates the strangeness of this, because if he does not, there is no sense in writing
poems, or notes to poems, or anything at all.
She seemed also calmer than before; her self-control had improved. During the
previous meetings, and throughout their marital life in Zembla, there had been, on her
part, dreadful outbursts of temper. When in the first years of marriage he had wished
to cope with those blazes and blasts, trying to make her take a rational view of her
misfortune, he had found them very annoying; but gradually he learned to take
advantage of them and welcomed them as giving him the opportunity of getting rid of
her presence for lengthening periods of time by not calling her back after a sequence
of doors had slammed ever more distantly, or by leaving the palace himself for some
rural hideout.
In the beginning of their calamitous marriage he had strenuously tried to possess her
but to no avail. He informed her he had never made love before (which was perfectly
true insofar as the implied object could only mean one thing to her), upon which he
was forced to endure the ridicule of having her dutiful purity involuntarily enact the
ways of a courtesan with a client too young or too old; he said something to that effect
(mainly to relieve the ordeal), and she made an atrocious scene. He farced himself
with aphrodisiacs, but the anterior characters of her unfortunate sex kept fatally
putting him off. One night when he tried tiger tea, and hopes rose high, he made the
mistake of begging her to comply with an expedient which she made the mistake of
denouncing as unnatural and disgusting. Finally he told her that an old riding accident
was incapacitating him but that a cruise with his pals and a lot of sea bathing would
be sure to restore his strength.
She had recently lost both parents and had no real friend to turn to for explanation and
advice when the inevitable rumors reached her; these she was too proud to discuss
with her ladies in waiting but she read books, found out all about our manly Zemblan
customs, and concealed her naïve distress under the great show of sarcastic
sophistication. He congratulated her on her attitude, solemnly swearing that he had
given up, or at least would give up, the practices of his youth; but everywhere along
the road powerful temptations stood at attention. He succumbed to them from time to
time, then every other day, then several times daily - especially during the robust
regime of Harfar Baron of Shalksbore, a phenomenally endowed young brute (whose
family name, "knave's farm," is the most probable derivation of "Shakespeare").
Curdy Buff - as Harfar was nicknamed by his admirers - had a huge escort of acrobats
and bareback riders, and the whole affair rather got out of hand so that Disa, upon
unexpectedly returning from a trip to Sweden, found the Palace transformed into a
circus. He again promised, again fell, and despite the utmost discretion was again
caught. At last she removed to the Riviera leaving him to amuse himself with a band
of Eton-collared, sweet-voiced minions imported from England.
What had the sentiments he entertained in regard to Disa ever amounted to? Friendly
indifference and bleak respect. Not even in the first bloom of their marriage had he
felt any tenderness or any excitement. Of pity, of heartache, there could be no
question. He was, had always been, casual and heartless. But the heart of his dreaming
self, both before and after the rupture, made extraordinary amends.
He dreamed of her more often, and with incomparably more poignancy, than his
surface-like feelings for her warranted; these dreams occurred when he least thought
of her, and worries in no way connected with her assumed her image in the subliminal
world as a battle or a reform becomes a bird of wonder in a tale for children. These
heart-rending dreams transformed the drab prose of his feelings for her into strong
and strange poetry, subsiding undulations of which would flash and disturb him
throughout the day, bringing back the pang and the richness - and then only the pang,
and then only its glancing reflection - but not affecting at all his attitude towards the
real Disa.
Her image, as she entered and re-entered his sleep, rising apprehensively from a
distant sofa or going in search of the messenger who, they said, had just passed
through the draperies, took into account changes of fashion: but the Disa wearing the
dress he had seen on her the summer of the Glass Works explosion, or last Sunday, or
in any other antechamber of time, forever remained exactly as she looked on the day
he had first told her he did not love her. That happened during a hopeless trip to Italy,
in a lakeside hotel garden - roses, black araucarias, rusty, greenish hydrangeas - one
cloudless evening with the mountains of the far shore swimming in a sunset haze and
the lake all peach syrup regularly rippled with pale blue, and the captions of a
newspaper spread flat on the foul bottom near the stone bank perfectly readable
through the shallow diaphanous filth, and because, upon hearing him out, she sank
down on the lawn in an impossible posture, examining a grass culm and frowning, he
had taken his words back at once; but the shock had fatally starred the mirror, and
thenceforth in his dreams her image was infected with the memory of that confession
as with some disease or the secret aftereffects of a surgical operation too intimate to
be mentioned.
The gist, rather than the actual plot of the dream, was a constant refutation of his not
loving her. His dream-love for her exceeded in emotional tone, in spiritual passion
and depth, anything he had experienced in his surface existence. This love was like an
endless wringing of hands, like a blundering of the soul through an infinite maze of
hopelessness and remorse. They were, in a sense, amorous dreams, for they were
permeated with tenderness, with a longing to sink his head onto her lap and sob away
the monstrous past. They brimmed with the awful awareness of her being so young
and so helpless. They were purer than his life. What carnal aura there was in them
came not from her but from those with whom he betrayed her - prickly-chinned
Phrynia, pretty Timandra with that boom under her apron - and even so the sexual
scum remained somewhere far above the sunken treasure and was quite unimportant.
He would see her being accosted by a misty relative so distant as to be practically
featureless. She would quickly hide what she held and extended her arched hand to be
kissed. He knew she had just come across a telltale object - a riding boot in his bed establishing beyond any doubt his unfaithfulness. Sweat beaded her pale, naked
forehead - but she had to listen to the prattle of a chance visitor or direct the
movements of a workman with a ladder who was nodding his head and looking up as
he carried it in his arms to the broken window. One might bear - a strong merciless
dreamer might bear - the knowledge of her grief and pride but none could bear the
sight of her automatic smile as she turned from the agony of the disclosure to the
polite trivialities required of her. She would be canceling an illumination, or
discussing hospital cots with the head nurse, or merely ordering breakfast for two in
the sea cave - and through the everyday plainness of the talk, through the play of the
charming gestures with which she always accompanied certain readymade phrases, he,
the groaning dreamer, perceived the disarray of her soul and was aware that an odious,
undeserved, humiliating disaster had befallen her, and that only obligations of
etiquette and her staunch kindness to a guiltless third party gave her the force to smile.
As one watched the light on her face, one foresaw it would fade in a moment, to be
replaced - as soon as the visitor left - by that impossible little frown the dreamer could
never forget. He would help her again to her feet on the same lakeside lawn, with
parts of the lake fitting themselves into the spaces between the rising balusters, and
presently he and she would be walking side by side along an anonymous alley, and he
would feel she was looking at him out of the corner of a faint smile but when he
forced himself to confront that questioning glimmer, she was no longer there.
Everything had changed, everybody was happy. And he absolutely had to find her at
once to tell her that he adored her, but the large audience before him separated him
from the door, and the notes reaching him through a succession of hands said that she
was not available; that she was inaugurating a fire; that she had married an American
businessman; that she had become a character in a novel; that she was dead.
No such qualms disturbed him as he sat now on the terrace of her villa and recounted
his lucky escape from the Palace. She enjoyed his description of the underground link
with the theater and tried to visualize the jolly scramble across the mountains; but the
part concerning Garh displeased her as if, paradoxically, she would have preferred
him to have gone through a bit of wholesome hough-magandy with the wench. She
told him sharply to skip such interludes, and he made her a droll little bow. But when
he began to discuss the political situation (two Soviet generals had just been attached
to the Extremist government as Foreign Advisers), a familiar vacant express on
appeared in her eyes. Now that he was safely out of the country, the entire blue bulk
of Zembla, from Embla Point to Emblem Bay, could sink in the sea for all she cared.
That he had lost weight was of more concern to her than that he had lost a kingdom.
Perfunctorily she inquired about the crown jewels; he revealed to her their unusual
hiding place, and she melted in girlish mirth as she had not done for years and years.
"I do have some business matters to discuss," he said. "And there are papers you have
to sign." Up in the trellis a telephone climbed with the roses. One of her former ladies
in waiting, the languid and elegant Fleur de Fyler (now fortyish and faded), still
wearing pearls in her raven hair and the traditional white mantilla, brought certain
documents from Disa's boudoir. Upon hearing the King's mellow voice behind the
laurels, Fleur recognized it before she could be misled by his excellent disguise. Two
footmen, handsome young strangers of a marked Latin type, appeared with the tea and
caught Fleur in mid-curtsey. A sudden breeze groped among the glycines. Defiler of
flowers. He asked Fleur as she turned to go with the Disa orchids if she still played
the viola. She shook her head several times not wishing to speak without addressing
him and not daring to do so while the servants might be within earshot.
They were alone again. Disa quickly found the papers he needed. Having finished
with that, they talked for a while about nice trivial things, such as the motion picture,
based on a Zemblan legend, that Odon hoped to make in Paris or Rome. How would
he represent, they wondered, the narstran, a hellish hall where the souls of murderers
were tortured under a constant drizzle of drake venom coming down from the foggy
vault? By and large the interview was proceeding in a most satisfactory manner though her fingers trembled a little when her hand touched the elbow rest of his chair.
Careful now.
"What are your plans?" she inquired. "Why can't you stay here as long as you want?
Please do. I'll be going to Rome soon, you'll have the whole house to yourself.
Imagine, you can bed here as many as forty guests, forty Arabian thieves." (Influence
of the huge terracotta vases in the garden.)
He answered he would be going to America some time next month and had business
in Paris tomorrow.
Why America? What would he do there?
Teach. Examine literary masterpieces with brilliant and charming young people. A
hobby he could now freely indulge.
"And, of course, I don't know," she mumbled looking away, "I don't know but perhaps
if you'd have nothing against it, I might visit New York - I mean, just for a week or
two, and not this year but the next."
He complimented her on her silver-spangled jacket. She persevered: "Well?" "And
your hairdo is most becoming." "Oh, what does it matter," she wailed, "what on earth
does anything matter!" "I must be on my way," he whispered with a smile and got up.
"Kiss me," she said, and was like a limp, shivering ragdoll in his arms for a moment.
He walked to the gate. At the turn of the path he glanced back and saw in the distance
her white figure with the listless grace of ineffable grief bending over the garden table,
and suddenly a fragile bridge was suspended between waking indifference and dreamlove. But she moved, and he saw it was not she at all but only poor Fleur de Fyler
collecting the documents left among the tea things. (See note to line 80.)
When in the course of an evening stroll in May or June,1959, I offered Shade all this
marvelous material, he looked at me quizzically and said: "That's all very well,
Charles. But there are just two questions. How can you know that all this intimate
stuff about your rather appalling king is true? And if true, how can one hope to print
such personal things about people who, presumably, are still alive?"
"My dear John," I replied gently and urgently, "do not worry about trifles. Once
transmuted by you into poetry, the stuff will be true, and the people will come alive. A
poet's purified truth can cause no pain, no offense. True art is above false honor."
"Sure, sure," said Shade. "One can harness words like performing fleas and make
them drive other fleas. Oh, sure."
"And moreover," I continued as we walked down the road right into a vast sunset, "as
soon as your poem is ready, as soon as the glory of Zembla merges with the glory of
your verse, I intend to divulge to you an ultimate truth, an extraordinary secret, that
will put your mind completely at rest."
