Lines 47-48: the frame house between Goldsworth and Wordsmith
The first name refers to the house in Dulwich Road that I rented from Hugh Warren
Goldsworth, authority on Roman Law and distinguished judge. I never had the
pleasure of meeting my landlord but I came to know his handwriting almost as well as
I do Shade's. The second name denotes, of course, Wordsmith University. In seeming
to suggest a midway situation between the two places, our poet is less concerned with
spatial exactitude than with a witty exchange of syllables invoking the two masters of
the heroic couplet, between whom he embowers his own muse. Actually, the "frame
house on its square of green" was five miles west of the Wordsmith campus but only
fifty yards or so distant from my east windows.
In the Foreword to this work I have had occasion to say something about the
amenities of my habitation. The charming, charmingly vague lady (see note to line
691), who secured it for me, sight unseen, meant well, no doubt, especially since it
was widely admired in the neighborhood for its "old-world spaciousness and
graciousness." Actually, it was an old, dismal, white-and-black, half-timbered house,
of the type termed wodnaggen in my country, with carved gables, drafty bow
windows and a so-called "semi-noble" porch, surmounted by a hideous veranda.
Judge Goldsworth had a wife, and four daughters. Family photographs met me in the
hallway and pursued me from room to room, and although I am sure that Alphina (9),
Betty (10), Candida (12), and Dee (14) will soon change from horribly cute little
schoolgirls to smart young ladies and superior mothers, I must confess that their pert
pictures irritated me to such an extent that finally I gathered them one by one and
dumped them all in a closet under the gallows row of their cellophane-shrouded
winter clothes. In the study I found a large picture of their parents, with sexes
reversed, Mrs. G. resembling Malenkov, and Mr. G. a Medusa-locked hag, and this I
replaced by the reproduction of a beloved early Picasso: earth boy leading raincloud
horse. I did not bother, though, to do much about the family books which were also all
over the house - four sets of different Children's Encyclopedias, and a stolid grown-up
one that ascended all the way from shelf to shelf along a flight of stairs to burst an
appendix in the attic. Judging by the novels in Mrs. Goldsworth's boudoir, her
intellectual interests were fully developed, going as they did from Amber to Zen. The
head of this alphabetic family had a library too, but this consisted mainly of legal
works and a lot of conspicuously lettered ledgers. All the layman could glean for
instruction and entertainment was a morocco-bound album in which the judge had
lovingly pasted the life histories and pictures of people he had sent to prison or
condemned to death: unforgettable faces of imbecile hoodlums, last smokes and last
grins, a strangler's quite ordinary-looking hands, a self-made widow, the close-set
merciless eyes of a homicidal maniac (somewhat resembling, I admit, the late Jacques
d'Argus), a bright little parricide aged seven ("Now, sonny, we want you to tell us -"),
and a sad pudgy old pederast who had blown up his blackmailer. What rather
surprised me was that he, my learned landlord, and not his "missus," directed the
household. Not only had he left me a detailed inventory of all such articles as cluster
around a new tenant like a mob of menacing natives, but he had taken stupendous
pains to write out on slips of paper recommendations, explanations, injunctions and
supplementary lists. Whatever I touched on the first day of my stay yielded a
specimen of Goldsworthiana. I unlocked the medicine chest in the second bathroom,
and out fluttered a message advising me that the slit for discarded safety blades was
too full to use. I opened the icebox, and it warned me with a bark that "no national
specialties with odors hard to get rid of" should be placed therein. I pulled out the
middle drawer of the desk in the study - and discovered a catalogue raisonné of its
meager contents which included an assortment of ashtrays, a damask paperknife
(described as "one ancient dagger brought by Mrs. Goldsworth's father from the
Orient"), and an old but unused pocket diary optimistically maturing there until its
calendric correspondencies came around again. Among various detailed notices
affixed to a special board in the pantry, such as plumbing instructions, dissertations on
electricity, discourses on cactuses and so forth, I found the diet of the black cat that
came with the house:

Mon, Wed, Fri: Liver
Tue, Thu, Sat: Fish
Sun: Ground meat

(All it got from me was milk and sardines; it was a likable little creature but after a
while its movements began to grate on my nerves and I farmed it out to Mrs. Finley,
the cleaning woman.) But perhaps the funniest note concerned the manipulations of
the window curtains which had to be drawn in different ways at different hours to
prevent the sun from getting at the upholstery. A description of the position of the sun,
daily and seasonal, was given for the several windows, and if I had heeded all this I
would have been kept as busy as a participant in a regatta. A footnote, however,
generously suggested that instead of manning the curtains, I might prefer to shift and
reshift out of sun range the more precious pieces of furniture (two embroidered
armchairs and a heavy "royal console") but should do it carefully lest I scratch the
wall moldings. I cannot, alas, reproduce the meticulous schedule of these transposals
but seem to recall that I was supposed to castle the long way before going to bed and
the short way first thing in the morning. My dear Shade roared with laughter when I
led him on a tour of inspection and had him find some of those bunny eggs for
himself. Thank God, his robust hilarity dissipated the atmosphere of damnum
infectum in which I was supposed to dwell. On his part, he regaled me with a number
of anecdotes concerning the judge's dry wit and courtroom mannerisms; most of these
anecdotes were doubtless folklore exaggerations, a few were evident inventions, and
all were harmless. He did not bring up, my sweet old friend never did, ridiculous
stories about the terrifying shadows that Judge Goldsworth's gown threw across the
underworld, or about this or that beast lying in prison and positively dying of
raghdirst (thirst for revenge) - crass banalities circulated by the scurrilous and the
heartless - by all those for whom romance, remoteness, sealskin-lined scarlet skies,
the darkening dunes of a fabulous kingdom, simply do not exist. But enough of this.
Let us turn to our poet's windows. I have no desire to twist and batter an unambiguous
apparatus criticus into the monstrous semblance of a novel.
Today it would be impossible for me to describe Shade's house in terms of
architecture or indeed in any terms other than those of peeps and glimpses, and
window-framed opportunities. As previously mentioned (see Foreword), the coming
of summer presented a problem in optics: the encroaching foliage did not always see
eye to eye with me: it confused a green monocle with an opaque occludent, and the
idea of protection with that of obstruction. Meanwhile (on July 3 according to my
agenda) I had learned - not from John but from Sybil - that my friend had started to
work on a long poem. After not having seen him for a couple of days, I happened to
be bringing him some third-class mail from his box on the road, adjacent to
Goldsworth's (which I used to ignore, crammed as it was with leaflets, local
advertisements, commercial catalogues, and that kind of trash) and ran into Sybil
whom a shrub had screened from my falcon eye. Straw-hatted and garden-gloved, she
was squatting on her hams in front of a flower bed and pruning or tying up something,
and her close-fitting brown trousers reminded me of the mandolin tights (as I jokingly
called them) that my own wife used to wear. She said not to bother him with those ads
and added the information about his having "begun a really big poem." I felt the blood
rush to my face and mumbled something about his not having shown any of it to me
yet, and she straightened herself, and swept the black and gray hair off her forehead,
and stared at me, and said: "What do you mean - shown any of it? He never shows
anything unfinished. Never, never. He will not even discuss it with you until it is quite,
quite finished." I could not believe it, but soon discovered on talking to my strangely
reticent friend that he had been well coached by his lady. When I endeavored to draw
him out by means of good-natured sallies such as: "People who live in glass houses
should not write poems," he would only yawn and shake his head, and retort that
"foreigners ought to keep away from old saws." Nevertheless the urge to find out
what he was doing with all the live, glamorous, palpitating, shimmering material I had
lavished upon him, the itching desire to see him at work (even if the fruit of his work
was denied me), proved to be utterly agonizing and uncontrollable and led me to
indulge in an orgy of spying which no considerations of pride could stop.
Windows, as well known, have been the solace of first-person literature throughout
the ages. But this observer never could emulate in sheer luck the eavesdropping Hero
of Our Time or the omnipresent one of Time Lost, Yet I was granted now and then
scraps of happy hunting. When my casement window ceased to function because of
an elm's gross growth, I found, at the end of the veranda, an ivied corner from which I
could view rather amply the front of the poet's house. If I wanted to see its south side I
could go down to the back of my garage and look from behind a tulip tree across the
curving downhill road at several precious bright windows, for he never pulled down
the shades (she did). If I yearned for the opposite side, all I had to do was walk uphill
to the top of my garden where my bodyguard of black junipers watched the stars, and
the omens, and the patch of pale light under the lone streetlamp on the road below. By
the onset of the season here conjured up, I had surmounted the very special and very
private fears that are discussed elsewhere (see note to line 62) and rather enjoyed
following in the dark a weedy and rocky easterly projection of my grounds ending in
a locust grove on a slightly higher level than the north side of the poet's house.
Once, three decades ago, in my tender and terrible boyhood, I had the occasion of
seeing a man in the act of making contact with God. I had wandered into the so-called
Rose Court at the back of the Ducal Chapel in my native Onhava, during an interval
in hymnal practice. As I mooned there, lifting and cooling my bare calves by turns
against a smooth column, I could hear the distant sweet voices interblending in
subdued boyish merriment which some chance grudge, some jealous annoyance with
one particular lad, prevented me from joining. The sound of rapid steps made me raise
my morose gaze from the sectile mosaic of the court - realistic rose petals cut out of
rodstein and large, almost palpable thorns cut out of green marble. Into these roses
and thorns there walked a black shadow: a tall, pale, long-nosed dark-haired young
minister whom I had seen around once or twice strode out of the vestry and without
seeing me stopped in the middle of the court. Guilty disgust contorted his thin lips. He
wore spectacles. His chenched hands seemed to be gripping invisible prison bars. But
there is no bound to the measure of grace which man may be able to receive. All at
once his look changed to one of rapture and reverence. I had never seen such a blaze
of bliss before but was to perceive something of that splendor, of that spiritual energy
and divine vision, now, in another land, reflected upon the rugged and homely face of
old John Shade. How glad I was that the vigils I had kept all through the spring had
prepared me to observe him at his miraculous midsummer task! I had learned exactly
when and where to find the best points from which to follow the contours of his
inspiration. My binoculars would seek him out and focus upon him from afar in his
various places of labor: at night, in the violet glow of his upstairs study where a
kindly mirror reflected for me his hunched-up shoulders and the pencil with which he
kept picking his ear (inspecting now and then the lead, and even tasting it); in the
forenoon, lurking in the ruptured shadows of his first-floor study where a bright
goblet of liquor quietly traveled from filing cabinet to lectern, and from lectern to
bookshelf, there to hide if need be behind Dante's bust; on a hot day, among the vines
of a small arborlike portico, through the garlands of which I could glimpse a stretch of
oilcloth, his elbow upon it, and the plump cherubic fist propping and crimpling his
temple. Incidents of perspective and lighting, interference by framework or leaves,
usually deprived me of a clear view of his face; and perhaps nature arranged it that
way so as to conceal from a possible predator the mysteries of generation; but
sometimes when the poet paced back and forth across his lawn, or sat down for a
moment on the bench at the end of it, or paused under his favorite hickory tree, I
could distinguish the expression of passionate interest, rapture and reverence, with
which he followed the images wording themselves in his mind, and I knew that
whatever my agnostic friend might say in denial, at that moment Our Lord was with
him.
On certain nights, when long before its inhabitants' usual bedtime the house would be
dark on the three sides I could, survey from my three vantage points, that very
darkness kept telling me they were at home. Their car stood near its garage - but I
could not believe they had gone out on foot, since in that case they would have left the
porch light turned on. Later considerations and deductions have persuaded me that the
night of great need on which I decided to check the matter was July 11, the date of
Shade's completing his Second Canto. It was a hot, black, blustery night. I stole
through the shrubbery to the rear of their house. At first I thought that this fourth side
was also dark, thus clinching the matter, and had time to experience a queer sense of
relief before noticing a faint square of light under the window of a little back parlor
where I had never been. It was wide open. A tall lamp with a parchment-like shade
illuminated the bottom of the room where I could see Sybil and John, her on the edge
of a divan, sidesaddle, with her back to me, and him on a hassock near the divan upon
which he seemed to be slowly collecting and stacking scattered playing cards left after
a game of patience. Sybil was alternatively huddle-shaking and blowing her nose;
John's face was all blotchy and wet. Not being aware at the time of the exact type of
writing paper my friend used, I could not help wondering what on earth could be so
tear-provoking about the outcome of a game of cards. As I strained to see better,
standing up to my knees in a horribly elastic box hedge, I dislodged the sonorous lid
of a garbage can. This of course might have been mistaken for the work of the wind,
and Sybil hated the wind. She at once left her perch, closed the window with a great
bang, and pulled down its strident blind.
I crept back to my cheerless domicile with a heavy heart and a puzzled mind. The
heart remained heavy but the puzzle was solved a few days later, very probably on St.
Swithin's Day, for I find in my little diary under that date the anticipatory "promnad
vespers mid J. S.," crossed out with a petulance that broke the lead in midstroke.
Having waited and waited for my friend to join me in the lane, until the red of the
sunset had turned to the ashes of dusk, I walked over to his front door, hesitated,
assessed the gloom and the silence, and started to walk around the house. This time
not a glint came from the back parlor, but by the bright prosaic light in the kitchen I
distinguished one end of a whitewashed table and Sybil sitting at it with so rapt a look
on her face that one might have supposed she had just thought up a new recipe. The
back door was ajar, and as I tapped it open and launched upon some gay airy phrase, I
realized that Shade, sitting at the other end of the table, was in the act of reading to
her something that I guessed to be a part of his poem. They both started. An
unprintable oath escaped from him and he slapped down on the table the stack of
index cards he had in his hand. Later he was to attribute this temperamental outburst
to his having mistaken, with his reading glasses on, a welcome friend for an intruding
salesman; but I must say it shocked me, it shocked me greatly, and disposed me at the
time to read a hideous meaning into everything that followed. "Well, sit down," said
Sybil, "and have some coffee" (victors are generous). I accepted, as I wanted to see if
the recitation would be continued in my presence. It was not. "I thought," I said to my
friend, "you were coming out with me for a stroll." He excused himself saying he felt
out of sorts, and continued to clean the bowl of his pipe as fiercely as if it were my
heart he was hollowing out.
Not only did I understand then that Shade regularly read to Sybil cumulative parts of
his poem but it also dawns upon me now that, just as regularly, she made him tone
down or remove from his Fair Copy everything connected with the magnificent
Zemblan theme with which I kept furnishing him and which, without knowing much
about the growing work, I fondly believed would become the main rich thread in its
weave!
Higher up on the same wooded hill stood, and still stands I trust, Dr. Sutton's old
clapboard house and, at the very top, eternity shall not dislodge Professor C.'s
ultramodern villa from whose terrace one can glimpse to the south the larger and
sadder of the three conjoined lakes called Omega, Ozero, and Zero (Indian names
garbled by early settlers in such a way as to accommodate specious derivations and
commonplace allusions). On the northern side of the hill Dulwich Road joins the
highway leading to Wordsmith University to which I shall devote here only a few
words partly because all kinds of descriptive booklets should be available to the
reader by writing to the University's Publicity Office, but mainly because I wish to
convey, in making this reference to Wordsmith briefer than the notes on the
Goldsworth and Shade houses, the fact that the college was considerably farther from
them than they were from one another. It is probably the first time that the dull pain of
distance is rendered through an effect of style and that a topographical idea finds its
verbal expression in a series of foreshortened sentences.
After winding for about four miles in a general eastern direction through a beautifully
sprayed and irrigated residential section with variously graded lawns sloping down on
both sides, the highway bifurcates: one branch goes left to New Wye and its expectant
airfield; the other continues to the campus. Here are the great mansions of madness,
the impeccably planned dormitories - bedlams of jungle music - the magnificent
palace of the Administration, the brick walls, the archways, the quadrangles blocked
out in velvet green and chrysoprase, Spencer House and its lily pond, the Chapel,
New Lecture Hail, the Library, the prisonlike edifice containing our classrooms and
offices (to be called from now on Shade Hall), the famous avenue to all the trees
mentioned by Shakespeare, a distant droning sound, the hint of a haze, the turquoise
dome of the Observatory, wisps and pale plumes of cirrus, and the poplar-curtained
Roman-tiered football field, deserted on summer days except for a dreamy-eyed
youngster flying - on a long control line in a droning circle - a motor-powered model
plane.
Dear Jesus, do something.
