Line 549: While snubbing gods including the big G
Here indeed is the Gist of the matter. And this, I think, not only the institute (see line 517) but our poet himself missed. For a Christian, no Beyond is acceptable or
imaginable without the participation of God in our eternal destiny, and this in turn
implies a condign punishment far every sin, great and small. My little diary happens
to contain a few jottings referring to a conversation the poet and I had on June 23 "on
my terrace after a game of chess, a draw." I transcribe them here only because they
cast a fascinating light on his attitude toward the subject.
I had mentioned - I do not recall in what connection - certain differences between my
Church and his. It should be noted that our Zemblan brand of Protestantism is rather
closely related to the "higher" churches of the Anglican Communion, but has some
magnificent peculiarities of its own. The Reformation with us had been headed by a
composer of genius; our liturgy is penetrated with rich music; our boy choirs are the
sweetest in the world. Sybil Shade came from a Catholic family but since early
girlhood developed, as she told me herself, "a religion of her own" - which is
generally synonymous, at the best, with a half-hearted attachment to some halfheathen sect or, at the worst, with tepid atheism. She had weaned her husband not
only from the Episcopal Church of his fathers, but from all forms of sacramental
worship.
We happened to start speaking of the general present-day nebulation of the notion of
"sin," of its confusion with the much more carnally colored ideal of "crime," and I
alluded briefly to my childhood contacts with certain rituals of our church. Confession
with us is auricular and is conducted in a richly ornamented recess, the confessionist
holding a lighted taper and standing with it beside the priest's high-backed seat which
is shaped almost exactly as the coronation chair of a Scottish king. Little polite boy
that I was, I always feared to stain his purple-black sleeve with the scalding tears of
wax that kept dripping onto my knuckles, forming there tight little crusts, and I was
fascinated by the illumed concavity of his ear resembling a seashell or a glossy orchid,
a convoluted receptacle that seemed much too large for the disposal of my
peccadilloes.
SHADE: All the seven deadly sins are peccadilloes but without three of them, Pride,
Lust and Sloth, poetry might never have been born.
KINBOTE: Is it fair to base objections upon obsolete terminology?
SHADE: All religions are based upon obsolete terminology.
KINBOTE: What we term Original Sin can never grow obsolete.
SHADE: I know nothing about that. In fact when I was small I thought it meant Cain
killing Abel. Personally, I am with the old snuff-takers: L'homme est né bon.
KINBOTE: Yet disobeying the Divine Will is a fundamental definition of Sin.
SHADE: I cannot disobey something which I do not know and the reality of which I
have the right to deny.
KINBOTE: Tut-tut. Do you also deny that there are sins?
SHADE: I can name only two: murder, and the deliberate infliction of pain.
KINBOTE: Then a man spending his life in absolute solitude could not be a sinner?
SHADE: He could torture animals. He could poison the springs on his island. He
could denounce an innocent man in a posthumous manifesto.
KINBOTE: And so the password is -?
SHADE: Pity.
KINBOTE: But who instilled it in us, John? Who is the Judge of life, and the
Designer of death?
SHADE: Life is a great surprise. I do not see why death should not be an even greater
one.
KINBOTE: Now I have caught you, John: once we deny a Higher Intelligence that
plans and administrates our individual hereafters we are bound to accept the
unspeakably dreadful notion of Chance reaching into eternity. Consider the situation,
Throughout eternity our poor ghosts are exposed to nameless vicissitudes. There is no
appeal, no advice, no support, no protection, nothing. Poor Kinbote's ghost, poor
Shade's shade, may have blundered, may have taken the wrong turn somewhere - oh,
from sheer absent-mindedness, or simply through ignorance of a trivial rule in the
preposterous game of nature - if there be any rules.
SHADE: There are rules in chess problems: interdiction of dual solutions, for instance.
KINBOTE: I had in mind diabolical rules likely to be broken by the other party as
soon as we come to understand them. That is why goetic magic does not always work.
The demons in their prismatic malice betray the agreement between us and them, and
we are again in the chaos of chance. Even if we temper Chance with Necessity and
allow godless determinism, the mechanism of cause and effect, to provide our souls
after death with the dubious solace of metastatistics, we still have to reckon with the
individual mishap, the thousand and second highway accident of those scheduled for
independence Day in Hades. No-no, if we want to be serious about the hereafter let us
not begin by degrading it to the level of a science-fiction yarn or a spiritualistic case
history. The ideal of one's soul plunging into limitless and chaotic afterlife with no
Providence to direct her SHADE: There is always a psychopompos around the corner, isn't there?
KINBOTE: Not around that corner, John. With no Providence the soul must rely on
the dust of its husk, on the experience gathered in the course of corporeal confinement,
and cling childishly to small-town principles, local by-laws and a personality
consisting mainly of the shadows of its own prison bars. Such an idea is not to be
entertained one instant by the religious mind. How much more intelligent it is - even
from a proud infidel's point of view! - to accept God's Presence - a faint
phosphorescence at first, a pale light in the dimness of bodily life, and a dazzling
radiance after it? I too, I too, my dear John, have been assailed in my time by religious
doubts. The church helped me to fight them off. It also helped me not to ask too much,
not to demand too clear an image of what is unimaginable. St. Augustine said -

SHADE: Why must one always quote St. Augustine to me?
KINBOTE: As St. Augustine said, "One can know what God is not; one cannot know
what He is." I think I know what He is not: He is not despair, He is not terror, He is
not the earth in one's rattling throat, not the black hum in one's ears fading to nothing
in nothing. I know also that the world could not have occurred fortuitously and that
somehow Mind is involved as a main factor in the making of the universe. In trying to
find the right name for that Universal Mind, or First Cause, or the Absolute, or Nature,
I submit that the Name of God has priority.
