Line 579: the other
Far from me be it to hint at the existence of some other woman in my friend's life.
Serenely he played the part of exemplary husband assigned to him by his small-town
admirers and was, besides, mortally afraid of his wife. More than once did I stop the
gossipmongers who linked his name with that of one of his students (see Foreword).
Of late, American novelists, most of whom are members of a United English
Department that, with one thing and another, must be more soaked in literary talent,
Freudian fancies, and ignoble heterosexual lust than all the rest of the world, have
driven the topic to extinction; therefore I could not face the tedium of introducing that
young lady here. Anyway, I hardly knew her. One evening I invited her to a little
party with the Shades for the express purpose of refuting those rumors; and that
reminds me I should say something about the curious rituals of invitation and
counterinvitation in bleak New Wye.
Upon referring to my little diary, I see that during the five-month period of my
intercourse with the Shades I was invited to their table exactly three times. Initiation
took place on Saturday, March the 14th, when I dined at their house with the
following people: Nattochdag (whom I saw every day in his office); Professor Gordon
of the Music Department (who completely dominated the conversation); the Head of the Russian Department (a farcical pedant of whom the less said the better); and three
or four interchangeable women (of whom one - Mrs. Gordon, I think) was enceinte,
and another, a perfect stranger, steadily talked to me, or rather into me, from eight to
eleven owing to an unfortunate afterdinner distribution of available seats. My next
treat, a smaller but by no means cozier souper on Saturday, May 23, was attended by
Milton Stone (a new librarian, with whom Shade discussed till midnight the
classification of certain Wordsmithiana); good old Nattochdag (whom I continued to
see every day); and an undeodorized Frenchwoman (who gave me a complete picture
of language-teaching conditions at the University of California). The date of my third
and last meal at the Shades is not entered in my little book but I know it was one
morning in June when I brought over a beautiful plan I had drawn of the King's
Palace in Onhava with all sorts of heraldic niceties, and a touch of gold paint that I
had some trouble in obtaining, and was graciously urged to stay for an impromptu
lunch. I should add that, despite my protests, at all three meals my vegetarian
limitations of fare were not taken into account, and I was exposed to animal matter in,
or around, some of the contaminated greens I might have deigned to taste. I revanched
myself rather neatly. Of a dozen or so invitations that I extended, the Shades accepted
just three. Every one of these meals was built around some vegetable that I subjected
to as many exquisite metamorphoses as Parmentier had his pet tuber undergo. Every
time I had but one additional guest to entertain Mrs. Shade (who, if you please thinning my voice to a feminine pitch - was allergic to artichokes, avocado pears,
African acorns - in fact to everything beginning with an "a"). I find nothing more
conducive to the blunting of one's appetite than to have none but elderly persons
sitting around one at table, fouling their napkins with the disintegration of their makeup, and surreptitiously trying, behind noncommittal smiles, to dislodge the red-hot
torture point of a raspberry seed from between false gum and dead gum. So I had
young people, students: the first time, the son of a padishah; the second time, my
gardener; and the third time, that girl in the black leotard, with that long white face
and eyelids painted a ghoulish green; but she came very late, and the Shades left very
early - in fact, I doubt if the confrontation lasted more than ten minutes, whereupon I
had the task of entertaining the young lady with phonograph records far into the night
when at last she rang up somebody to accompany her to a "diner" in Dulwich.
