Line 596: Points at the puddle in his basement room
We all know those dreams in which something Stygian soaks through and Lethe leaks
in the dreary terms of defective plumbing. Following this line, there is a false start
preserved in the draft - and I hope the reader will feel something of the chill that ran
down my long and supple spine when I discovered this variant:

Should the dead murderer try to embrace
His outraged victim whom he now must face?
Do objects have a soul? Or perish must
Alike great temples and Tanagra dust?

The last syllable of "Tanagra" and the first three letters of "dust" from the name of the
murderer whose shargar (puny ghost) the radiant spirit of our poet was soon to face.
"Simple chance!" the pedestrian reader may cry. But let him try to see, as I have tried
to see, how many such combinations are possible and plausible. "Leningrad used to
be Petrograd?" "A prig rad (obs. past tense of read) us?"
This variant is so prodigious that only scholarly discipline and a scrupulous regard for
the truth prevented me from inserting it here, and deleting four lines elsewhere (for
example, the weak lines 627-630) so as to preserve the length of the poem.
Shade composed these lines on Tuesday, July 14th. What was Gradus doing that day?
Nothing. Combinational fate rests on its laurels. We saw him last on the late afternoon
of July 10th when he returned from Lex to his hotel in Geneva, and there we left him.
For the next four days Gradus remained fretting in Geneva. The amusing paradox
with these men of action is that they constantly have to endure long stretches of
otiosity that they are unable to fill with anything, lacking as they do the resources of
an adventurous mind. As many people of little culture, Gradus was a voracious reader
of newspapers, pamphlets, chance leaflets and the multilingual literature that comes
with nose drops and digestive tablets; but this summed up his concessions to
intellectual curiosity, and since his eyesight was not too good, and the consumability
of local news not unlimited, he had to rely a great deal on the torpor of sidewalk cafes
and on the makeshift of sleep.
How much happier the wide-awake indolents, the monarchs among men, the rich
monstrous brains deriving intense enjoyment and rapturous pangs from the balustrade
of a terrace at nightfall, from the lights and the lake below, from the distant mountain
shapes melting into the dark apricot of the afterglow, from the black conifers outlined
against the pale ink of the zenith, and from the garnet and green flounces of the water
along the silent, sad, forbidden shoreline. Oh my sweet Boscobel! And the tender and
terrible memories, and the shame, and the glory, and the maddening intimation, and
the star that no party member can ever reach.
On Wednesday morning, still without news, Gradus telegraphed headquarters saying
that he thought it unwise to wait any longer and that he would be staying at Hotel
Lazuli, Nice.
