Line 629: The fate of beasts
Above this the poet wrote and struck out:

The madman's fate

The ultimate destiny of madmen's souls has been probed by many Zemblan
theologians who generally hold the view that even the most demented mind still
contains within its diseased mass a sane basic particle that survived death and
suddenly expands, bursts out as it were, in peals of healthy and triumphant laughter
when the world of timorous fools and trim blockheads has fallen away far behind.
Personally, I have not known any lunatics; but have heard of several amusing cases in
New Wye ("Even in Arcady am I," says Dementia, chained to her gray column).
There was for instance a student who went berserk. There was an old tremendously
trustworthy college porter who one day, in the Projection Room, showed a squeamish
coed something of which she had no doubt seen better samples; but my favorite case
is that of an Exton railway employee whose delusion was described to me by Mrs. H.,
of all people. There was a big Summer School party at the Hurleys', to which one of
my second ping-pong table partners, a pal of the Hurley boys had taken me because I
knew my poet was to recite there something and I was beside myself with
apprehension believing it might be my Zembla (it proved to be an obscure poem by
one of his obscure friends - my Shade was very kind to the unsuccessful). The reader
will understand if I say that, at my altitude, I can never feel "lost" in a crowd, but it is
also true that I did not know many people at the H.'s. As I circulated, with a smile on
my face and a cocktail in my hand, through the crush, I espied at last the top of my
poet's head and the bright brown chignon of Mrs. H. above the back of two adjacent
chairs: At the moment I advanced behind them I heard him object to some remark she
had just made:
"That is the wrong word," he said. "One should not apply it to a person who
deliberately peels off a drab and unhappy past and replaces it with a brilliant invention.
That's merely turning a new leaf with the left hand."
I patted my friend on the head and bowed slightly to Eberthella H. The poet looked at
me with glazed eyes. She said:
"You must help us, Mr. Kinbote: I maintain that what's his name, old - the old man,
you know, at the Exton railway station, who thought he was God and began
redirecting the trains, was technically a loony, but John calls him a fellow poet."
"We all are, in a sense, poets, Madam," I replied, and offered a lighted match to my
friend who had his pipe in his teeth and was beating himself with both hands on
various parts of his torso.
I am not sure this trivial variant has been worth commenting; indeed, the whole
passage about the activities of the IPH would be quite Hudibrastic had its pedestrian
verse been one foot shorter.
