Line 681: gloomy Russians spied
There is really nothing metaphysical, or racial, about this gloom. It is merely the
outward sign of congested nationalism and a provincial's sense of inferiority - that
dreadful blend so typical of Zemblans under the Extremist rule and of Russians under
the Soviet regime. Ideas in modern Russia are machine-cut blocks coming in solid
colors; the nuance is outlawed, the interval walled up, the curve grossly stepped.
However, not all Russians are gloomy, and the two young experts from Moscow
whom our new government engaged to locate the Zemblan crown jewels turned out to
be positively rollicking. The Extremists were right in believing that Baron Bland, the
Keeper of the Treasure, had succeeded in hiding those jewels before he jumped or fell
from the North Tower; but they did not know he had had a helper and were wrong in
thinking the jewels must be looked for in the palace which the gentle white-haired
Bland had never left except to die. I may add, with pardonable satisfaction, that they
were, and still are, cached in a totally different - and quite unexpected - corner of
Zembla.
In an earlier note (to line 130) the reader has already glimpsed those two treasure
hunters at work. After the King's escape and the belated discovery of the secret
passage, they continued their elaborate excavations until the palace was all
honeycombed and partly demolished, an entire wall of one room collapsing one night,
to yield, in a niche whose presence nobody had suspected, an ancient salt cellar of
bronze and King Wigbert's drinking horn; but you will never find our crown, necklace
and scepter.
All this is the rule of a supernal game, all this is the immutable fable of fate, and
should not be construed as reflecting on the efficiency of the two Soviet experts - who,
anyway, were to be marvelously successful on a later occasion with another job (see note to line 747). Their names (probably fictitious) were Andronnikov and Niagarin.
One has seldom seen, at least among waxworks, a pair of more pleasant, presentable
chaps. Everybody admired their clean-shaven jaws, elementary facial expressions,
wavy hair, and perfect teeth. Tall handsome Andronnikov seldom smiled but the
crinkly little rays of his orbital flesh bespoke infinite humor while the twin furrows
descending from the sides of his shapely nostrils evoked glamorous associations with
flying aces and sagebrush heroes. Niagarin, on the other hand, was of comparatively
short stature, had somewhat more rounded, albeit quite manly features, and every now
and then would flash a big boyish smile remindful of scoutmasters with something to
hide, or those gentlemen who cheat in television quizzes. It was delightful to watch
the two splendid Sovietchiks running about in the yard and kicking a chalk-dusty,
thumping-tight soccer ball (looking so large and bald in such surroundings).
Andronnikov could tap-play it on his toe up and down a dozen times before punting it
rocket straight into the melancholy, surprised, bleached, harmless heavens: and
Niagarin could imitate to perfection the mannerisms of a certain stupendous Dynamo
goalkeeper. They used to hand out to the kitchen boys Russian caramels with plums
or cherries depicted on the rich luscious six-cornered wrappers that enclosed a jacket
of thinner paper with the mauve mummy inside; and lustful country girls were known
to creep up along the drungen (bramble-choked footpaths) to the very foot of the
bulwark when the two silhouetted against the now flushed sky sang beautiful
sentimental military duets at eventide on the rampart. Niagarin had a soulful tenor
voice, and Andronnikov a hearty baritone, and both wore elegant jackboots of soft
black leather, and the sky turned away showing its ethereal vertebrae.
Niagarin who had lived in Canada spoke English and French; Andronnikov had some
German. The little Zemblan they knew was pronounced with that comical Russian
accent that gives vowels a kind of didactic plenitude of sound. They were considered
models of dash by the Extremist guards, and my dear Odonello once earned a harsh
reprimand from the commandant by not having withstood the temptation to imitate
their walk: both moved with an identical little swagger, and both were conspicuously
bandy-legged.
When I was a child, Russia enjoyed quite a vogue at the court of Zembla but that was
a different Russia - a Russia that hated tyrants and Philistines, injustice and cruelty,
the Russia of ladies and gentlemen and liberal aspirations. We may add that Charles
the Beloved could boast of some Russian blood. In medieval times two of his
ancestors had married Novgorod princesses. Queen Yaruga (reigned 1799-1800) his
great-great-granddam, was half Russian; and most historians believe that Yaruga's
only child Igor was not the son of Uran the Last (reigned 1798-1799) but the fruit of
her amours with the Russian adventurer Hodinski, her goliart (court jester) and a poet
of genius, said to have forged in his spare time a famous old Russian chanson de geste
generally attributed to an anonymous bard of the twelfth century.
