Line 691: the attack
John Shade's heart attack (Oct. 17, 1958) practically coincided with the disguised
king's arrival in America where he descended by parachute from a chartered plane
piloted by Colonel Montacute, in a field of hay-feverish, rank-flowering weeds, near
Baltimore whose oriole is not an oriole. It had all been perfectly timed, and he was
still wrestling with the unfamiliar French contraption when the Rolls-Royce from
Sylvia O'Donnell's manor turned toward his green silks from a road and approached
along the mowntrop, its fat wheels bouncing disapprovingly and its black shining
body slowly gliding along. Fain would I elucidate this business of parachuting but (it
being a matter of mere sentimental tradition rather than a useful manner of
transportation) this is not strictly necessary in these notes to Pale Fire. While
Kingsley, the British chauffeur, an old and absolutely faithful retainer, was doing his
best to cram the bulky and ill-folded parachute into the boot, I relaxed on a shooting
stick  he had supplied me with, sipping a delightful Scotch and water from the car bar
and glancing (amid an ovation of crickets and that vortex of yellow and maroon
butterflies that so pleased Chateaubriand on his arrival in America) at an article in The
New York Times in which Sylvia had vigorously and messily marked out in red pencil
a communication from New Wye which told of the poet's hospitalization. I had been
looking forward to meeting my favorite American poet who, as I felt sure at the
moment, would die long before the Spring Term, but the disappointment was little
more than a mental shrug of accepted regret, and discarding the newspaper, I looked
around me with enchantment and physical wellbeing despite the congestion in my
nose. Beyond the field the great green steps of turf ascended to the multicolored
coppices; one could see above them the white brow of the manor; clouds melted into
the blue. Suddenly I sneezed, and sneezed again. Kingsley offered me another drink
but I declined it, and democratically joined him in the front seat. My hostess was in
bed, suffering from the aftereffects of a special injection that she had been given in
anticipation of a journey to a special place in Africa. In answer to my "Well, how are
you?" she murmured that the Andes had been simply marvelous, and then in a slightly
less indolent tone of voice inquired about a notorious actress with whom her son was
said to be living in sin. Odon, I said, had promised me he would not marry her. She
inquired if I had had a good hop and dingled a bronze bell. Good old Sylvia! She had
in common with Fleur de Fyler a vagueness of manner, a languor of demeanor which
was partly natural and partly cultivated as a convenient alibi for when she was drunk,
and in some wonderful way she managed to combine that indolence with volubility
reminding one of a slow-speaking ventriloquist who is interrupted by his garrulous
doll. Changeless Sylvia! During three decades I had seen from time to time, from
palace to palace, that same flat nut-colored bobbed hair, those childish pale-blue eyes,
the vacant smile, the stylish long legs, the willowy hesitating movements.
A tray with fruit and drinks was brought in by a jeune beauté, as dear Marcel would
have put it, nor could one help recalling another author, Gide the Lucid, who praises
in his African notes so warmly the satiny skin of black imps.
"You nearly lost the opportunity to meet our brightest star," said Sylvia who was
Wordsmith University's main trustee (and, in point of fact, had been solely
responsible for arranging my amusing lectureship there). "I have just called up the
college - yes, take that footstool - and he is much better. Try this mascana fruit, I got
it especially for you, but the boy is strictly hetero, and, generally speaking, Your
Majesty will have to be quite careful from now on. I'm sure you'll like it up there
though I wish I could figure out why anybody should be so keen on teaching Zemblan.
I think Disa ought to come too. I have rented for you what they say is their best house,
and it is near the Shades."
She knew them very slightly but had heard many endearing stories about the poet
from Billy Reading, "one of the very few American college presidents who know
Latin." And let me add here how much I was honored a fortnight later to meet in
Washington that limp-looking, absent-minded, shabbily dressed splendid American
gentleman whose mind was a library and not a debating hall. Next Monday Sylvia
flew away but I stayed on for a while, resting from my adventures, musing, reading,
taking notes, and riding a lot in the lovely countryside with two charming ladies and
their shy little groom. I have often felt when leaving a place that I had enjoyed,
somewhat like a tight cork that is drawn out for the sweet dark wine to be drained, and
then you are off to new vineyards and conquests. I spent a couple of pleasant months
visiting the libraries of New York and Washington, flew to Florida for Christmas, and
when ready to start for my new Arcady deemed it nice and dutiful to send the poet a
polite note congratulating him on his restored health and jokingly "warning" him that
beginning with February he would have a very ardent admirer of his for neighbor. I
never received any answer, and my civility was never recalled later so I suppose it got
lost among the many "fan" letters that literary celebrities receive, although one might
have expected Sylvia or somebody to have told the Shades of my arrival.
The poet's recovery turned out indeed to be very speedy and would have to be called
miraculous had there been anything organically wrong with his heart. There was not;
a poet's nerves can play the queerest tricks but they also can quickly recapture the
rhythm of health, and soon John Shade, in his chair at the head of an oval table, was
again speaking of his favorite Pope to eight pious young men, a crippled extramural
woman and three coeds, one of them a tutorial dream. He had been told not to curtail
his customary exercise, such as walks, but I must admit I experienced myself
palpitations and cold sweats at the sight of that precious old man wielding rude garden
tools or squirming up the college hall stairs as a Japanese fish up a cataract.
Incidentally: the reader should not take too seriously or too literally the passage about
the alert doctor (an alert doctor, who as I well know once confused neuralgia with
cerebral sclerosis). As I gathered from Shade himself, no emergency incision was
performed; the heart was not compressed by hand; and if it stopped pumping at all,
the pause must have been very brief and so to speak superficial. All this of course
cannot detract from the great epic beauty of the passage. (Lines 691-697)
Lines 697: Conclusive destination
Gradus landed at the Côte d'Azur airport in the early afternoon of July 15, 1959.
Despite his worries he could not help being impressed by the torrent of magnificent
trucks, agile motor bicycles and cosmopolitan private cars on the Promenade. He
remembered and disliked the torrid heat and the blinding blue of the sea. Hotel Lazuli,
where before World War Two he had spent a week with a consumptive Bosnian
terrorist, when it was a squalid, running-water place frequented by young Germans,
was now a squalid, running-water place frequented by old Frenchmen. It was situated
in a transverse street, between two thoroughfares parallel to the quay, and the
ceaseless roar of crisscross traffic mingling with the grinding and banging of
construction work proceeding under the auspices of a crane opposite the hotel (which
had been surrounded by a stagnant calm two decades earlier) was a delightful surprise
for Gradus, who always liked a little noise to keep his mind off things. ("Ça distrait,"
as he said to the apologetic hostlerwife and her sister.)
After scrupulously washing his hands, he went out again, a tremor of excitement
running like fever down his crooked spine. At one of the tables of a sidewalk cafe on
the corner of his street and the Promenade, a man in a bottle-green jacket, sitting in
the company of an obvious whore, clapped both palms to his face, emitted the sound
of a muffled sneeze; and kept masking himself with his hands as he pretended to wait
for the second installment. Gradus walked along the north side of the embankment.
After stopping for a minute before the display of a souvenir shop, he went inside,
asked the price of a little hippopotamus made of violet glass, and purchased a map of
Nice and its environs. As he walked on to the taxi stand in rue Gambetta, he happened
to notice two young tourists in loud shirts stained with sweat, their faces and necks a
bright pink from the heat and imprudent solarization; they carried carefully folded
over their arms the silk-lined doublebreasted coats of their wide-trousered dark suits
and did not look at our sleuth who despite his being exceptionally unobservant felt the
undulation of something faintly familiar as they brushed past. They knew nothing of
his presence abroad or of his interesting job; in point of fact, only a few minutes ago
had their, and his, superior discovered that Gradus was in Nice and not in Geneva.
Neither had Gradus been informed that he would be assisted in his quest by the Soviet
sportsmen, Andronnikov and Niagarin, whom he had casually met once or twice on
the Onhava Palace grounds when re-paning a broken window and checking for the
new government the rare Rippleson panes in one of the ex-royal hothouses; and next
moment he had lost the thread end of recognition as he settled down with the prudent
wriggle of a short-legged person in the back seat of an old Cadillac and asked to be
taken to a restaurant between Pellos and Cap Turc. It is hard to say what our man's
hopes and intentions were. Did he want just to peep through the myrtles and oleanders
at an imagined swimming pool? Did he expect to hear the continuation of Gordon's
bravura piece played now in another rendition, by two larger and stronger hands?
Would he have crept, pistol in hand, to where, a sun-bathing giant lay spread-eagled, a
spread eagle of hair on his chest? We do not know, nor did Gradus perhaps know
himself; anyway, he was spared an unnecessary journey. Modern taximen are as
talkative as were the barbers of old, and even before the old Cadillac had rolled out of
town, our unfortunate killer knew that his driver's brother had worked in the gardens
of Villa Disa but that at present nobody lived there, the Queen having gone to Italy for
the rest of July.
At his hotel the beaming proprietress handed him a telegram. It chided him in Danish
for leaving Geneva and told him to undertake nothing until further notice. It also
advised him to forget his work and amuse himself. But what (save dreams of blood)
could be his amusements? He was not interested in sightseeing or seasiding. He had
long stopped drinking. He did not go to concerts. He did not gamble. Sexual impulses
had greatly bothered him at one time but that was over. After his wife, a beader in
Radugovitra, had left him (with a gypsy lover), he had lived in sin with his mother-inlaw until she was removed, blind and dropsical, to an asylum for decayed widows.
Since then he had tried several times to castrate himself, had been laid up at the
Glassman Hospital with a severe infection, and now, at forty-four, was quite cured of
the lust that Nature, the grand cheat, puts into us to inveigle us into propagation. No
wonder the advice to amuse himself infuriated him. I think I shall break this note here.~
