Line 71: parents
With commendable alacrity, Professor Hurley produced an Appreciation of John
Shade's published works within a month after the poet's death. It came out in a skimpy
literary review, whose name momentarily escapes me, and was shown to me in
Chicago where I interrupted for a couple of days my automobile journey from New
Wye to Cedarn, in these grim autumnal mountains.
A Commentary where placid scholarship should reign is not the place for blasting the
preposterous defects of that little obituary. I have only mentioned it because that is
where I gleaned a few meager details concerning the poet's parents. His father,
Samuel Shade, who died at fifty, in 1902, had studied medicine in his youth and was
vice-president of a firm of surgical instruments in Exton. His chief passion, however,
was what our eloquent necrologist calls "the study of the feathered tribe," adding that
"a bird had been named for him: Bombycilla Shadei" (this should be "shadei," of
course). The poet's mother, nee Caroline Lukin, assisted him in his work and drew the
admirable figures of his Birds of Mexico, which I remember having seen in my
friend's house. What the obituarist does not know is that Lukin comes from Luke, as
also do Locock and Luxon and Lukashevich. It represents one of the many instances
when the amorphous-looking but live and personal hereditary patronymic grows,
sometimes in fantastic shapes, around the common pebble of a Christian name. The
Lukins are an old Essex family. Other names derive from professions such as Rymer,
Scrivener, Linner (one who illuminates parchments), Botkin (one who makes
bottekins, fancy footwear) and thousands of others. My tutor, a Scotsman, used to call
any old tumble-down building "a hurley-house." But enough of this.
A few other items concerning John Shade's university studies and the middle years of
his singularly uneventful life can be looked up by his reader in the professor's article.
It would have been on the whole a dull piece had it not been enlivened, if that is the
term, by certain special features. Thus, there is only one allusion to my friend's
masterpiece (the neatly stacked batches of which, as I write this, lie in the sun on my
table as so many ingots of fabulous metal) and this I transcribe with morbid delight:
"Just before our poet's untimely death he seems to have been working on an
autobiographical poem." The circumstances of this death are completely distorted by
the professor, a fateful follower of the gentlemen of the daily press who - perhaps for
political reasons - had falsified the culprit's motives and intentions without awaiting
his trial - which unfortunately was not to take place in this world (see eventually my
ultimate note). But, of course, the most striking characteristic of the little obituary is
that it contains not one reference to the glorious friendship that brightened the last
months of John's life.
My friend could not evoke the image of his father. Similarly, the King, who also was
not quite three when his father, King Alfin, died, was unable to recall his face,
although oddly he did remember perfectly well the little monoplane of chocolate that
he, a chubby babe, happened to be holding in that very last photograph (Christmas
1918) of the melancholy, riding-breeched aviator in whose lap he reluctantly and
uncomfortably sprawled.
Alfin the Vague (1873-1918; regnal dates 1900-1918, but 1900-1919 in most
biographical dictionaries, a fumble due to the coincident calendar change from Old
Style to New) was given his cognomen by Amphitheatricus, a not unkindly writer of
fugitive poetry in the liberal gazettes (who was also responsible for dubbing my
capital Uranograd!). King Alfin's absent-mindedness knew no bounds. He was a
wretched linguist having at his disposal only a few phrases of French and Danish, but
every time he had to make a speech to his subjects - to a group of gaping Zemblan
yokels in some remote valley where he had crash-landed - some uncontrollable switch
went into action in his mind, and he reverted to those phrases, flavoring them for
topical sense with a little Latin. Most of the anecdotes relating to his naïve fits of
abstraction are too silly and indecent to sully these pages; but one of them that I do
not think especially funny induced such guffaws from Shade (and returned to me, via
the Common Room, with such obscene accretions) that I feel inclined to give it here
as a sample (and as a corrective). One summer before the first world war, when the
emperor of a great foreign realm (I realize how few there are to choose from) was
paying an extremely unusual and flattering visit to our little hard country, my father
took him and a young Zemblan interpreter (whose sex I leave open) in a newly
purchased custom-built car on a jaunt in the countryside. As usual, King Alfin
traveled without a vestige of escort, and this, and his brisk driving seemed to trouble
his guest. On their way back, some twenty miles from Onhava, King Alfin decided to
stop for repairs. While he tinkered with the motor, the emperor and the interpreter
sought the shade of some pines by the highway, and only when King Alfin was back
in Onhava, did he gradually realize from a reiteration of rather frantic questions that
he had left somebody behind ("What emperor?" has remained his only memorable
mot). Generally speaking, in respect of any of my contributions (or what I thought to
be contributions) I repeatedly enjoined my poet to record them in writing, by all
means, but not to spread them in idle speech; even poets, however, are human.
King's Alfin's absent-mindedness was strangely combined with a passion for
mechanical things, especially for flying apparatuses. In 1912, he managed to rise in an
umbrella-like Fabre "hydroplane" and almost got drowned in the sea between Nitra
and Indra. He smashed two Farmans, three Zemblan machines, and a beloved Santos
Dumont Demoiselle. A very special monoplane, Blenda IV, was built for him in 1916
by his constant "aerial adjutant." Colonel Peter Gusev (later a pioneer parachutist and,
at seventy, one of the greatest jumpers of all time), and this was his bird of doom. On
the serene, and not too cold, December morning that the angels chose to net his mild
pure soul, King Alfin was in the act of trying solo a tricky vertical loop that Prince
Andrey Kachurin, the famous Russian stunter and War One hero, had shown him in
Gatchina. Something went wrong, and the little Blenda was seen to go into an
uncontrolled dive. Behind and above him, in a Caudron biplane, Colonel Gusev (by
then Duke of Rahl) and the Queen snapped several pictures of what seemed at first a
noble and graceful evolution but then turned into something else. At the last moment,
King Alfin managed to straighten out his machine and was again master of gravity
when, immediately afterwards, he flew smack into the scaffolding of a huge hotel
which was being constructed in the middle of a coastal heath as if for the special
purpose of standing in a king's way. This uncompleted and badly gutted building was
ordered razed by Queen Blenda who had it replaced by a tasteless monument of
granite surmounted by an improbable type of aircraft made of bronze. The glossy
prints of the enlarged photographs depicting the entire caiastrophe were discovered
one day by eight-year-old Charles Xavier in the drawer of a secretary bookcase. In
some of these ghastly pictures one could make out the shoulders and leathern casque
of the strangely unconcerned aviator, and in the penultimate one of the series, just
before the white-blurred shattering crash, one distinctly saw him raise one arm in
triumph, and reassurance. The boy had hideous dreams after that but his mother never
found out that he had seen those infernal records.
Her he remembered - more or less: a horsewoman, tall, broad, stout, ruddy-faced. She
had been assured by a royal cousin that her son would be safe and happy under the
tutelage of admirable Mr. Campbell who had taught several dutiful little princesses to
spread butterflies and enjoy Lord Ronald's Coronach. He had immolated his life, so to
speak, at the portable altars of a vast number of hobbies, from the study of book mites
to bear hunting, and could reel off Macbeth from beginning to end during hikes; but
he did not give a damn for his charges' morals, preferred ladies to laddies, and did not
meddle in the complexities of Zemblan ingledom. He left, for some exotic court, after
a ten-year stay, in 1932 when our Prince, aged seventeen, had begun dividing his time
between the University and his regiment. It was the nicest period in his life. He never
could decide what he enjoyed more: the study of poetry - especially English poetry or attending parades, or dancing in masquerades with boy-girls and girl-boys. His
mother died suddenly on July 21, 1936, from an obscure blood ailment that had also
afflicted her mother and grandmother. She had been much better on the day before and Charles Xavier had gone to an all-night ball in the so-called Ducal Dome in
Grindelwood: for the nonce, a formal heterosexual affair, rather refreshing after some
previous sport. At about four in the morning, with the sun enflaming the tree crests
and Mt. Falk, a pink cone, the King stopped his powerful car at one of the gates of the
palace. The air was so delicate, the light so lyrical, that he and the three friends he had
with him decided to walk through the linden bosquet the rest of the distance to the
Pavonian Pavilion where guests were lodged. He and Otar, a platonic pal, wore tails
but they had lost their top hats to the highway winds. A strange something struck all
four of them as they stood under the young limes in the prim landscape of scarp and
counterscarp fortified by shadow and countershadow. Otar, a pleasant and cultured
adeling with a tremendous nose and sparse hair, had his two mistresses with him,
eighteen-year-old Fifalda (whom he later married) and seventeen-year-old Fleur
(whom we shall meet in two other notes), daughters of Countess de Fyler, the Queen's
favorite lady in waiting. One involuntarily lingers over that picture, as one does when
standing at a vantage point of time and knowing in retrospect that in a moment one's
life would undergo a complete change. So here was Otar, looking with a puzzled
expression at the distant window's of the Queen's quarters, and there were the two
girls, side by side, thin-legged, in shimmering wraps, their kitten noses pink, their
eyes green and sleepy, their earrings catching and loosing the fire of the sun. There
were a few people around, as there always were, no matter the hour, at this gate, along
which a road, connecting with the eastern highway, ran. A peasant woman with a
small cake she had baked, doubtlessly the mother of the sentinel who had not yet
come to relieve the unshaven dark young nattdett (child of night) in his dreary sentry
box, sat on a spur stone watching in feminine fascination the luciola-like tapers that
moved from window to window; two workmen, holding their bicycles, stood staring
too at those strange lights; and a drunk with a walrus mustache kept staggering around
and patting the trunks of the lindens. One picks up minor items at such slowdowns of
life. The King noticed that some reddish mud flecked the frames of the two bicycles
and that their front wheels were both turned in the same direction, parallel to one
another. Suddenly, down a steep path among the lilac bushes - a short cut from the
Qucen's quarters - the Countess came running and tripping over the hem of her quilted
robe, and at the same moment, from another side of the palace, all seven councilors,
dressed in their formal splendor and carrying like plum cakes replicas of various
regalia, came striding down the stairs of stone, in dignified haste, but she beat them by
one alin and spat out the news. The drunk started to sing a ribald ballad about "KarlieGarlie" and fell into the demilune ditch. It is not easy to describe lucidly in short notes
to a poem the various approaches to a fortified castle, and so, in my awareness of this
problem, I prepared for John Shade, some time in June, when narrating to him the
events briefly noticed in some of my comments (see note to line 130, for example), a
rather handsomely drawn plan of the chambers, terraces, bastions and pleasure
grounds of the Onhava Palace. Unless it has been destroyed or stolen, this careful
picture in colored inks on a large (thirty by twenty inches) piece of cardboard might
still be where I last saw it in mid-July, on the top of the big black trunk, opposite the
old mangle, in a niche of the little corridor leading to the so-called fruit room. If it is
not there, it might be looked for in his upper-floor study. I have written about this to
Mrs. Shade but she does not reply to my letters. In case it still exists, I wish to beg her,
without raising my voice, and very humbly, as humbly as the lowliest of the King's
subjects might plead for an immediate restitution of his rights (the plan is mine and is
clearly signed with a black chess-king crown after "Kinbote"), to send it, well packed,
marked not to be bent on the wrapper, and by registered mail, to my publisher for
reproduction in later editions of this work. Whatever energy I possessed has quite
ebbed away lately, and these excruciating headaches now make impossible the
mnemonic effort and eye strain that the drawing of another such plan would demand.
The black trunk stands on another brown or brownish even larger one, and there is I
think a stuffed fox or coyote next to them in their dark corner.

