Line 741: the outer glare
On the morning of July 16 (while Shade was working on the 698-746 section of his
poem) dull Gradus, dreading another day of enforced inactivity in sardonically,
sparkling, stimulatingly noisy Nice, decided that until hunger drove him out he would
not budge from a leathern armchair in the simulacrum of a lobby among the brown
smells of his dingy hotel. Unhurriedly he went through a heap of old magazines on a
nearby table. There he sat, a little monument of taciturnity, sighing, puffing out his
cheeks, licking his thumb before turning a page, gaping at the pictures, and moving
his lips as he climbed down the columns of printed matter. Having replaced
everything in a neat pile, he sank back in his chair closing and opening his gabled
hands in various constructions of tedium - when a man who had occupied a seat next
to him got up and walked into the outer glare leaving his paper behind. Gradus pulled
it into his lap, spread it out - and froze over a strange piece of local news that caught
his eye: burglars had broken into Villa Disa and ransacked a bureau, taking from a
jewel box a number of valuable old medals.
Here was something to brood upon. Had this vaguely unpleasant incident some
bearing on his quest? Should he do something about it? Cable headquarters? Hard to
word succinctly a simple fact without having it look like a cryptogram. Airmail a
clipping? He was in his room working on the newspaper with a safety razor blade
when there was a bright rap-rap at the door. Gradus admitted an unexpected visitor one of the greater Shadows, whom he had thought to be onhava-onhava ("far, far
away"), in wild, misty, almost legendary Zembla! What stunning conjuring tricks our
magical mechanical age plays with old mother space and old father time!
He was a merry, perhaps overmerry, fellow, in a green velvet jacket. Nobody liked
him, but he certainly had a keen mind. His name, Izumrudov, sounded rather Russian
but actually meant "of the Umruds," an Eskimo tribe sometimes seen paddling their
umyaks (hide-lined boats) on the emerald waters of our northern shores. Grinning, he
said friend Gradus must get together his travel documents, including a health
certificate, and take the earliest available jet to New York. Bowing, he congratulated
him on having indicated with such phenomenal acumen the right place and the right
way. Yes, after a thorough perlustration of the loot that Andron and Niagarushka had
obtained from the Queen's rosewood writing desk (mostly bills, and treasured
snapshots, and those silly medals) a letter from the King did turn up giving his address
which was of all places - Our man, who interrupted the herald of success to say he had
never - was bidden not to display so much modesty. A slip of paper was now
produced on which Izumrudov, shaking with laughter (death is hilarious), wrote out
for Gradus their client's alias, the name of the university where he taught, and that of
the town where it was situated. No, the slip was not for keeps. He could keep it only
while memorizing it. This brand of paper (used by macaroon makers) was not only
digestible but delicious. The gay green vision withdrew - to resume his whoring no
doubt. How one hates such men!
~
