Line 80: my bedroom
Our Prince was fond of Fleur as of a sister but with no soft shadow of incest or
secondary homosexual complications. She had a small pale face with prominent
cheekbones, luminous eyes, and curly dark hair. It was rumored that after going about
with a porcelain cup and Cinderella's slipper for months, the society sculptor and poet
Arnor had found in her what he sought and had used her breasts and feet for his Lilith
Calling Back Adam; but I am certainly no expert in these tender matters. Otar, her
lover, said that when you walked behind her, and she knew you were walking behind
her, the swing and play of those slim haunches was something intensely artistic,
something Arab girls were taught in special schools by special Parisian panders who
were afterwards strangled. Her fragile ankles, he said; which she placed very close
together in her dainty and wavy walk, were the "careful jewels" in Arnor's poem
about a miragarl ("mirage girl"), for which "a dream king in the sandy wastes of time
would give three hundred camels and three fountains."

On ságaren werém tremkín tri stána
Verbálala wod gév ut trí phantána

(I have marked the stress accents).

The Prince did not heed this rather kitschy prattle (all, probably, directed by her
mother) and, let it be repeated, regarded her merely as a sibling, fragrant and
fashionable, with a painted pout and a maussade, blurry, Gallic way of expressing the
little she wished to express. Her unruffled rudeness toward the nervous and garrulous
Countess amused him. He liked dancing with her - and only with her. He hardly
squirmed at all when she stroked his hand or applied herself soundlessly with open
lips to his cheek which the haggard after-the-ball dawn had already sooted. She did
not seem to mind when he abandoned her for manlier pleasures; and she met him
again in the dark of a car or in the half-glow of a cabaret with the subdued and
ambiguous smile of a kissing cousin.
The forty days between Queen Blenda's death and his coronation was perhaps the
most trying stretch of time in his life. He had had no love for his mother, and the
hopeless and helpless remorse he now felt degenerated into a sickly physical fear of
her phantom. The Countess, who seemed to be near him, to be rustling at his side, all
the time, had him attend table-turning seances with an experienced American medium,
seances at which the Queen's spirit, operating the same kind of planchette she had
used in her lifetime to chat with Thormodus Torfaeus and A. R. Wallace, now briskly
wrote in English: "Charles take take cherish love flower flower flower." An old
psychiatrist so thoroughly bribed by the Countess as to look, even on the outside, like
a putrid pear, assured him that his vices had subconsciously killed his mother and
would continue "to kill her in him" if he did not renounce sodomy. A palace intrigue
is a special spider that entangles you more nastily at every desperate jerk you try. Our
Prince was young, inexperienced, and half-frenzied with insomnia. He hardly
struggled at all. The Countess spent a fortune on buying his kamergrum (groom of the
chamber), his bodyguard, and even the greater part of the Court Chamberlain. She
took to sleeping in a small antechamber next to his bachelor bedroom, a splendid
spacious circular apartment at the top of the high and massive South West Tower.
This had been his father's retreat and was still connected by a jolly chute in the wall
with a round swimming pool in the hall below, so that the young Prince could start the
day as his father used to start it by slipping open a panel beside his army cot and
rolling into the shaft whence he whizzed down straight into bright water. For other
needs than sleep Charles Xavier had installed in the middle of the Persian rug-covered
floor a so-called patifolia, that is, a huge, oval, luxuriously flounced, swansdown
pillow the size of a triple bed. It was in this ample nest that Fleur now slept, curled up
in its central hollow, under a coverlet of genuine giant panda fur that had just been
rushed from Tibet by a group of Asiatic well-wishers on the occasion of his ascension
to the throne. The antechamber, where the Countess was ensconced, had its own inner
staircase and bathroom, but also communicated by means of a sliding door with the
West Gallery. I do not know what advice or command her mother had given Fleur;
but the little thing proved a poor seducer. She kept trying, as one quietly insane, to
mend a broken viola d'amore or sat in dolorous attitudes comparing two ancient flutes,
both sad-tuned and feeble. Meantime, in Turkish garb, he lolled in his father's ample
chair, his legs over its arm, flipping through a volume of Historia Zemblica, copying
out passages and occasionally fishing out of the nether recesses of his seat a pair of
old-fashioned motoring goggles, a black opal ring, a ball of silver chocolate wrapping,
or the star of a foreign order.

It was warm in the evening sun. She wore on the second day of their ridiculous
cohabitation nothing except a kind of buttonless and sleeveless pajama top. The sight
of her four bare limbs and three mousepits (Zemblan anatomy) irritated him, and
while pacing about and pondering his coronation speech, he would toss towards her,
without looking, her shorts or a terrycloth robe. Sometimes, upon returning to the
comfortable old chair he would find her in it contemplating sorrowfully the picture of
a bogtur (ancient warrior) in the history book. He would sweep her out of his chair,
his eyes still on his writing pad, and stretching herself she would move over to the
window seat and its dusty sunbeam; but after a while she tried to cuddle up to him,
and he had to push away her burrowing dark curly head with one hand while writing
with the other or detach one by one her little pink claws from his sleeve or sash.
Her presence at night did not kill insomnia, but at least kept at bay the strong ghost of
Queen Blenda. Between exhaustion and drowsiness, he trifled with paltry fancies,
such as getting up and pouring out a little cold water from a decanter onto Fleur's
naked shoulder so as to extinguish upon it the weak gleam of a moonbeam.
Stentoriously the Countess snored in her lair. And beyond the vestibule of his vigil
(here he began falling asleep), in the dark cold gallery, lying all over the painted
marble and piled three or four deep against the locked door, some dozing, some
whimpering, were his new boy pages, a whole mountain of gift boys from Troth, and
Tuscany, and Albanoland.
He awoke to find her standing with a comb in her hand before his - or rather, his
grandfather's - cheval glass, a triptych of bottomless light, a really fantastic mirror,
signed with a diamond by its maker, Sudarg of Bokay. She turned about before it: a
secret device of reflection gathered an infinite number of nudes in its depths, garlands
of girls in graceful and sorrowful groups, diminishing in the limpid distance, or
breaking into individual nymphs, some of whom, she murmured, must resemble her
ancestors when they were young - little peasant garlien combing their hair in shallow
water as far as the eye could reach, and then the wistful mermaid from an old tale, and
then nothing.
On the third night a great stomping and ringing of arms came from the inner stairs,
and there burst in the Prime Councilor, three Representatives of the People, and the
chief of a new bodyguard. Amusingly, it was the Representatives of the People whom
the idea of having for queen the granddaughter of a fiddler infuriated the most. That
was the end of Charles Xavier's chaste romance with Fleur, who was pretty yet not
repellent (as some cats are less repugnant than others to the good-natured dog told to
endure the bitter effluvium of an alien genus). With their white suitcases and obsolete
musical instruments the two ladies wandered back to the annex of the Palace. There
followed a sweet twang of relief - and then the door of the anteroom slid open with a
merry crash and the whole heap of putti tumbled in.
He was to go through a far more dramatic ordeal thirteen years later with Disa,
Duchess of Payn, whom he married in 1949, as described in notes to lines 275 and
433-434, which the student of Shade's poem will reach in due time; there is no hurry.
A series of cool summers ensued. Poor Fleur was still around, though indistinctly so.
Disa befriended her after the old Countess perished in the crowded vestibule of the
1950 Exposition of Glass Animals, when part of it was almost destroyed by fire,

Gradus helping the fire brigade to clear a space in the square for the lynching of the
non-union incendiaries, or at least of the persons (two baffled tourists from Denmark)
who have been mistaken for them. Our young Queen may have felt some subtle
sympathy for her pale lady in waiting whom from time to time the King glimpsed
illuminating a concert program by the diagonal light of an ogival window, or. heard
making tinny music in Bower B. The beautiful bedroom of his bachelor days is
alluded to again in a note to line 130, as the place of his "luxurious captivity" in the
beginning of the tedious and unnecessary Zemblan Revolution.
