Line 802: mountain
The passage 797 (second part of line)-809, on the poet's sixty-fifth card, was
composed between the sunset of July 18 and the dawn of July 19. That morning I had
prayed in two different churches (on either side, as it were, of my Zemblan
denomination, not represented in New Wye) and had strolled home in an elevated
state of mind. There was no cloud in the wistful sky, and the very earth seemed to be
sighing after our Lord Jesus Christ. On such sunny, sad mornings I always feel in my
bones that there is a chance yet of my not being excluded from Heaven, and that
salvation may be granted to me despite the frozen mud and horror in my heart. As I
was ascending with bowed head the gravel path to my poor rented house, I heard with
absolute distinction, as if he were standing at my shoulder and speaking loudly, as to a
slightly deaf man, Shade's voice say: "Come tonight, Charlie." I looked around me in
awe and wonder: I was quite alone. I at once telephoned. The Shades were out, said
the cheeky ancillula, an obnoxious little fan who came to cook for them on Sundays
and no doubt dreamt of getting the old poet to cuddle her some wifeless day. I
retelephoned two hours later; got, as usual, Sybil; insisted on talking to my friend (my
"messages" were never transmitted), obtained him, and asked him as calmly as
possible what he had been doing around noon when I had heard him like a big bird in
my garden. He could not quite remember, said wait a minute, he had been playing
golf with Paul (whoever that was), or at least watching Paul play with another
colleague. I cried that I must see him in the evening and all at once, with no reason at
all, burst into tears, flooding the telephone and gasping for breath, a paroxysm which
had not happened to me since Bob left me on March 30. There was a flurry of
confabulation between the Shades, and then John said: "Charles, listen. Let's go for a
good ramble tonight, I'll meet you at eight." It was my second good ramble since July
6 (that unsatisfactory nature talk); the third one, on July 21, was to be exceedingly
brief.
Where was I? Yes, trudging along again as in the old days with John, in the woods of
Arcady, under a salmon sky.
"Well," I said gaily, "what were you writing about last night, John? Your study
window was simply blazing."
"Mountains," he answered.
The Bera Range, an erection of veined stone and shaggy firs, rose before me in all its
power and pride. The splendid news made my heart pound, and I felt that I could now,
in my turn, afford to be generous. I begged my friend not to impart to me anything
more if he did not wish it. He said yes, he did not, and began bewailing the difficulties
of his self-imposed task. He calculated that during the last twenty-four hours his brain
had put in, roughly, a thousand minutes of work, and had produced fifty lines (say,
797-847) or one syllable every two minutes. He had finished his Third, penultimate,
Canto, and had started on Canto Four, his last (see Foreword, see Foreword, at once),
and would I mind very much if we started to go home - though it was only around
nine - so that he could plunge back into his chaos and drag out of it, with all its wet
stars, his cosmos?
How could I say no? That mountain air had gone to my head: he was reassembling my
Zembla!
