Line 949: And all the time
Thus, some time in the morning of July 21, the last day of his life, John Shade began
his last batch of cards (seventy-seven to eighty). Two silent time zones had now
merged to form the standard time of one man's fate; and it is not impossible that the
poet in New Wye and the thugin New York awoke that morning at the same crushed
beat of their Timekeeper's stopwatch.

Line 949: and all the time
And all the time he was coming nearer.
A formidable thunderstorm had greeted Gradus in New York on the night of his
arrival from Paris (Monday, July 20). The tropical rainfall flooded basements and
subway tracks: Kaleidoscopic reflections played in the riverlike streets. Vinogradus
had never seen such a display of lightning, neither had Jacques d'Argus - or Jack Grey,
for that matter (let us not forget Jack Grey!). He put up in a third-class Broadway
hotel and slept soundly, lying belly up on the bedclothes, in striped pajamas - the kind
that Zemblans call rusker sirsusker ("Russian seersucker suit") - and retaining as
usual his socks: not since July 11, when he had visited a Finnish bathhouse in
Switzerland, had he seen his bare feet.
It was now July 21. At eight in the morning New York roused Gradus with a bang and
a roar. As usual he started his blurry daily existence by blowing his nose. Then he
took out of its nightbox of cardboard and inserted into his Comus-mask mouth an
exceptionally large and fierce-looking set of teeth: the only bad flaw really in his
otherwise harmless appearance. This done, he fished out of his briefcase two petitbeurres he had saved and an even older but still quite palatable small, softish, nearham sandwich, vaguely associated with the train journey from Nice to Paris last
Saturday night: not so much thriftiness on his part (the Shadows had advanced him a
handsome sum, anyway), but an animal attachment to the habits of his frugal youth.
After breakfasting in bed on these delicacies, he began preparations for the most
important day in his life. He had shaved yesterday - that was out of the way. His
trusty pajamas he stuffed not into his traveling bag but into the briefcase, dressed,
unclipped from the inside of his coat a cameo-pink, interdentally clogged pocket
comb, drew it through his bristly hair, carefully donned his trilby, washed both hands
with the nice, modern liquid soap in the nice, modern, almost odorless lavatory across
the corridor, micturated, rinsed one hand, and feeling clean and neat, went out for a
stroll.

He had never visited New York before; but as many near-cretins, he was above
novelty. On the previous night he had counted the mounting rows of windows in
several skyscrapers, and now, after checking the height of a few more buildings, he
felt that he knew all there was to know. He had a brimming cup and a half a saucerful
of coffee at a crowded and wet counter and spent the rest of the smoke-blue morning
moving from bench to bench and paper to paper in the Westside alleys of Central Park.
He began with the day's copy of The New York Times. His lips moving like wrestling
worms, he read about all kinds of things. Hrushchov (whom they spelled
"Khrushchev") had abruptly put off a visit to Scandinavia and was to visit Zembla
instead (here I tune in: "Vi nazïvaete sebya zemblerami, you call yourselves Zemblans,
a ya vas nazïvayu zemlyakami, and I call you fellow countrymen!" Laughter and
applause.) The United States was about to launch its first atom-driven merchant ship
(just to annoy the Ruskers, of course. J.G.). Last night in Newark, an apartment house
at 555 South Street was hit by a thunderbolt that smmashed a TV set and injured two
people watching an actress lost in a violent studio storm (those tormented spirits are
terrible! C.X.K. teste J.S.). The Rachel Jewelry Company in Brooklyn advertised in
agate type for a jewelry polisher who "must have experience on costume jewelry (oh,
Degré had!). The Helman brothers said they had assisted in the negotiations for the
placement of a sizable note: "$11,000,000, Decker Glass Manufacturing Company,
Inc., note due July 1, 1979," and Gradus, grown young again, reread this this twice,
with the background gray thought, perhaps, that he would be sixty-four four days after
that (no comment). On another bench he found a Monday issue of the same
newspaper. During a visit to a museum in Whitehorse (Gradus kicked at a pigeon that
came too near), the Queen of England walked to a corner of the White Animals Room,
removed her right glove and, with her back turned to several evidently observant
people, rubbed her forehead and one of her eyes. A pro-Red revolt had erupted in Iraq.
Asked about the Soviet exhibition at the New York Coliseum, Carl Sandburg, a poet,
replied, and I quote: "They make their appeal on the highest of intellectual levels." A
hack reviewer of new books for tourists, reviewing his own tour through Norway, said
that the fjords were too famous to need (his) description, and that all Scandinavians
loved flowers. And at a picnic for international children a Zemblan moppet cried to
her Japanese friend: Ufgut, ufgut, velkum ut Semblerland! (Adieu, adieu, till we meet
in Zembla!) I confess it has been a wonderful game - this looking up in the WUL of
various ephemerides over the shadow of a padded shoulder.
Jacques d'Argus looked for a twentieth time at his watch. He strolled like a pigeon
with his hands behind him. He had his mahogany shoes shined - and appreciated the
way the dirty but pretty boy clacked taut his rag. In a restaurant on Broadway he
consumed a large portion of pinkish pork with sauerkraut, a double helping of elastic
French fries, and the half of an overripe melon. From my rented cloudlet I
contemplate him with quiet surprise: here he is, this creature ready to commit a
monstrous act - and coarsely enjoying a coarse meal! We must assume, I think, that
the forward projection of what imagination he had, stopped at the act, on the brink of
all its possible consequences; ghost consequences, comparable to the ghost toes of an
amputee or to the fanning out of additional squares which a chess knight (that skipspace piece), standing on a marginal file, "feels" in phantom extensions beyond the
board, but which have no effect whatever on his real moves, on the real play.

He strolled back and paid the equivalent of three thousand Zemblan crowns for his
short but nice stay at Beverland Hotel. With the illusion of practical foresight he
transferred his fiber suitcase and - after a moment of hesitation - his raincoat to the
anonymous security, of a station locker - where, I suppose, they are still lying as snug
as my gemmed scepter, ruby necklace, and diamond-studded crown in - no matter,
where. On his fateful journey he took only the battered black briefcase we know: it
contained a clean nylon shirt, a dirty pajama, a safety razor, a third petit-beurre, an
empty cardbox box, a thick illustrated paper he had not quite finished with in the park,
a glass eye he once made for his old mistress, and a dozen syndicalist brochures, each
in several copies, printed with his own hands many years ago.
He had to check in at the airport at 2 P.M. The night before, when making his
reservation, he had not been able to get a seat on the earlier flight to New Wye
because of some convention there. He had fiddled with railway schedules, but these
had evidently been arranged by a practical joker since the only available direct train
(dubbed the Square Wheel by our jolted and jerked students) left at 5:13 A.M.,
dawdled at flag stations, and took eleven hours to cover the four hundred miles to
Exton; you could try to cheat it by going via Washington but then you had to wait
there at least three hours, for a sleepy local. Buses were out so far as Gradus was
concerned since he always got roadsick in them unless he drugged himself with
Fahrmamine pills, and that might affect his aim. Come to think of it, he was not
feeling too steady anyway.
Gradus is now much nearer to us in space and time than he was in the preceding
cantos. He has short upright black hair. We can fill in the bleak oblong of his face
with most of its elements such as thick eyebrows and a wart on the chin. He has a
ruddy but unhealthy complexion. We see, fairly in focus, the structure of his
somewhat mesmeric organs of vision. We see his melancholy nose with its crooked
ridge and grooved tip. We see the mineral blue of his jaw and the gravelly pointillé of
his suppressed mustache.
We know already some of his gestures, we know the chimpanzee slouch of his broad
body and short hindlegs. We have heard enough about his creased suit. We can at last
describe his tie, an Easter gift from a dressy butcher, his brother-in-law in Onhava:
imitation silk, color chocolate brown, barred with red, the end tucked into the shirt
between the second and third buttons, a Zemblan fashion of the nineteen thirties - and
a father-waistcoat substitute according to the learned. Repulsive black hairs coat the
back of his honest rude hands, the scrupulously clean hands of an ultra-unionized
artisan, with a perceptible deformation of both thumbs; typical of bobêchemakers. We
see, rather suddenly, his humid flesh. We can even make out (as, head-on but quite
safely, phantom-like, we pass through him, through the shimmering, propeller of his
flying machine, through the delegates waving and grinning at us) his magenta and
mulberry insides, and the strange, not so good sea swell undulating in his entrails.
We can now go further and describe, to a doctor or to anybody else willing to listen to
us, the condition of this primate's soul. He could read, write and reckon, he was
endowed with a modicum of self-awareness (with which he did not know what to do),
some duration consciousness, and a good memory for faces, names, dates and the like.
Spiritually he did not exist. Morally he was a dummy pursuing another dummy. The
fact that his weapon was a real one, and his quarry a highly developed human being,
this fact belonged to our world of events; in his, it had no meaning. I grant you that
the idea of destroying "the king" did hold for him some degree of pleasure, and
therefore we should add to the list of his personal parts the capacity of forming
notions, mainly general notions, as I have mentioned in another note which I will not
bother to look up. There might be (I am allowing a lot) a slight, very slight, sensual
satisfaction, not more I would say than what a petty hedonist enjoys at the moment
when, retaining his breath, before a magnifying mirror, his thumbnails pressing with
deadly accuracy on both sides of a full stop, he expulses totally the eely,
semitransparent plug of a comedo - and exhales an Ah of relief. Gradus would not
have killed anybody had he not derived pleasure not only from the imagined act
(insofar as he was capable of imagining a palpable future) but also from having been
given an important, responsible assignment (which happened to require he should kill)
by a group of people sharing his- notion of justice, but he would not have taken that
job if in killing he had not found something like that rather disgusting anticomedoist's
little thrill.
I have considered in my earlier note (I now see it is the note to line 171) the particular
dislikes, and hence the motives, of our "automatic man," as I phrased it at a time when
he did not have as much body, did not offend the senses as violently as now; was, in a
word, further removed from our sunny, green, grass-fragrant Arcady. But Our Lord
has fashioned man so marvelously that no amount of motive hunting and rational
inquiry can ever really explain how and why anybody is capable of destroying a
fellow creature (this argument necessitates, I know, a temporary granting to Gradus of
the status of man), unless he is defending the life of his son, or his own, or the
achievement of a lifetime; so that in final judgment of the Gradus versus the Crown
case I would submit that if his human incompleteness be deemed insufficient to
explain his idiotic journey across the Atlantic just to empty the magazine of his gun;
we may concede, doctor, that our half-man was also half mad.
Aboard the small and uncomfortable plane flying into the sun he found himself
wedged among several belated delegates to the New Wye Linguistic Conference, all
of them lapel-labeled, and representing the same foreign language, but none being
able to speak it, so that conversation was conducted (across our hunched-up killer and
on all sides of his immobile face) in rather ordinary Anglo-American. During this
ordeal, poor Gradus kept wondering what caused another discompfort which kept
troubling him on and off throughout the flight, and which was worse than the babble
of the monolinguists. He could not settle what to attribute it to - pork, cabbage, fried
potatoes or melon - for upon retasting them one by one in spasmodic retrospect he
found little to choose between their different but equally sickening flavors. My own
opinion, which I would like the doctor to confirm, is that the French sandwich was
engaged in an intestinal internecine war with the "French" fries.
Upon arriving after five at the New Wye airport he drank two papercupfuls of nice
cold milk from a dispenser and acquired a map at the desk. With broad blunt finger
tapping the configuration of the campus that resembled a writhing stomach, he asked
the clerk what hotel was nearest to the university. A car, he was told, would take him
to the Campus Hotel which was a few minutes' walk from the Main Hall (now Shade
Hall). During the ride he suddenly became aware of such urgent qualms that he was
forced to visit the washroom as soon as he got to the solidly booked hotel. There his
misery resolved itself in a scaldinging torrent of indigestion. Hardly had he refastened
his trousers and checked the bulge of his hip pocket than a renewal of stabs and
squeaks caused him to strip his thighs again which he did with such awkward
precipitation that his small Browning was all but sent flying into the depths of the
toilet.
He was still groaning and grinding his dentures when he and his briefcase re-offended
the sun. It shone with all sorts of speckled effects through the trees. and College Town
was gay with summer students and visiting linguists, among whom Gradus might
have easily passed for a salesman hawking Basic-English primers for American
schoolchildren or those wonderful new translating machines that can do it so much
faster than a man or an animal.
A grave disappointment awaited him at Main Hall: it had closed for the day. Three
students lying on the grass suggested he try the Library, and all three pointed to it
across the lawn. Thither trudged our thug.
"I don't know where he lives," said the girl at the desk. "But I know he is here right
now. You'll find him, I'm sure, in North West Three where we have the Icelandic
Collection. You go south [waving her pencil] and turn west, and then west again
where you see a sort of, a sort of [pencil making a circular wiggle - round table?
round bookshelf?] - No, wait a minute, you better just keep going west till you hit the
Florence Houghton Room, and there you cross over to the north side of the building.
You cannot miss it" [returning pencil to ear].
Not being a mariner or a fugitive king, he promptly got lost and after vainly
progressing through a labyrinth of stacks, asked about the Icelandic Collection of a
stern-looking mother librarian who was checking cards in a steel cabinet on a landing.
Her slow and detailed directions promptly led him back to the main desk.
"Please, I cannot find," he said, slowly shaking his head.
"Didn't you -" he girl began, and suddenly pointed up: "Oh, there he is!"
Along the open gallery that ran above the hall, parallel to its short side, a tall bearded
man was crossing over at a military quick march from east to west. He vanished
behind a bookcase but not before Gradus had recognized the great rugged frame, the
erect carriage, the high-bridged nose, the straight brow, and the energetic arm swing,
of Charles Xavier the Beloved.
Our pursuer made for the nearest stairs - and soon found himself among the bewitched
hush of Rare Books. The room was beautiful and had no doors; in fact, some
moments passed before he could discover the draped entrance he himself had just
used. The awful perplexities of his quest blending with the renewal of impossible
pangs in his belly, he dashed back - ran three steps down and nine steps up, and burst
into a circular room where a bald-headed suntanned professor in a Hawaiian shirt sat
at a round table reading with an ironic expression on his face a Russian book. He paid
no attention to Gradus who traversed the room, stepped over a fat little white dog
without awakening it, clattered down a helical staircase and found himself in Vault P.
Here, a well-lit, pipe-lined, white-washed passage led hint to the sudden paradise of a
water closet for plumbers or lost scholars where, cursing, he hurriedly transferred his
automatic from its precarious dangle-pouch to his coat and relieved himself of another
portion of the liquid hell inside him. He started to climb up again, and noticed in the
temple light of the stacks an employee, a slim Hindu boy, with a call card in his hand.
I had never spoken to that lad but had felt more than once his blue-brown gaze upon
me, and no doubt my academic pseudonym was familiar to him but some sensitive
cell in him, some chord of intuition, reacted to the harshness of the killer's
interrogation and, as if protecting me from a cloudy danger, he smiled and said: "I do
not know him, sir."
Gradus returned to the Main Desk.
"Too bad," said the girl, "I just saw him leave."
"Bozhe moy, Bozhe moy," muttered Gradus, who sometimes at moments of stress used
Russian ejaculations.
"You'll find him in the directory," she said pushing it towards him, and dismissing the
sick man's existence to attend to the wants of Mr. Gerald Emerald who was taking out
a fat bestseller in a cellophane jacket.
Moaning and shifting from one foot to the other, Gradus started leafing through the
college directory but when he found the address, he was faced with the problem of
getting there.
"Dulwich Road," he cried to the girl. "Near? Far? Very far, probably?"
"Are you by any chance Professor Pnin's new assistant?" asked Emerald.
"No," said the girl. "This man is looking for Dr. Kinbote, I think. You are looking for
Dr. Kinbote, aren't you?"
"Yes, and I can't any more," said Gradus.
"I thought so," said the girl. "Doesn't he live somewhere near Mr. Shade, Gerry?"
"Oh, definitely," said Gerry, and turned to the killer: "I can drive you there if you like.
It is on my way."
Did they talk in the car, these two characters, the man in green and the man in brown?
Who can say? They did not. After all, the drive took only a few minutes (it took me,
at the wheel of my powerful Kramler, four and a half).
"I think I'll drop you here," said Mr. Emerald. "It's that house up there."
One finds it hard to decide what Gradus alias Grey wanted more at that minute:
discharge his gun or rid himself of the inexhaustible lava in his bowels. As he began

hurriedly fumbling at the car door, unfastidious Emerald leaned, close to him, across
him, almost merging with him, to help him open it - and then, slamming it shut again,
whizzed on to some tryst in the valley. My reader will, I hope, appreciate all the
minute particulars I have taken such trouble to present to him after a long talk I had
with the killer; he will appreciate them even more if I tell him that, according to the
legend spread later by the police, Jack Grey had been given a lift, all the way from
Roanoke, or somewhere, by a lonesome trucker! One can only hope that an impartial
search will turn up the trilby forgotten in the Library - or in Mr. Emerald's car.
Line 957: Night Rote
I remember one little poem from Night Rote (meaning "the nocturnal sound of the
sea") that happened to be my first contact with the American poet Shade. A young
lecturer on American Literature, a brilliant and charming boy from Boston, showed
me that slim and lovely volume in Onhava, in my student days. The following lines
opening this poem, which is entitled "Art," pleased me by their catchy lilt and jarred
upon the religious sentiments instilled in me by our very "high" Zemblan church.

From mammoth hunts and Odysseys
And Oriental charms
To the Italian goddesses
With Flemish babes in arms.
