Line 991: horseshoes
Neither Shade nor I had ever been able to ascertain whence precisely those ringing
sounds came - which of the five families dwelling across the road on the lower slopes
of our woody hill played horseshoe quoits every other evening; but the tantalizing
tingles and jingles contributed a pleasant melancholy note to the rest of Dulwich Hill's
evening sonorities - children calling to each other, children being called home, and the
ecstatic barking of the boxer dog whom most of the neighbors disliked (he overturned
garbage cans) greeting his master home.
Through the trees I distinguished John's white shirt and gray hair; he sat in his Nest
(as he called it), the arborlike porch or veranda I have mentioned in my note to lines
47-48. I could not keep from advancing a little nearer - oh, discreetly, almost on tiptoe;
but then I noticed he was resting, not writing, and I openly walked up to his porch or
perch. His elbow was on the table, his fist supported his temple, his wrinkles were all
awry, his eyes moist and misty; he looked like an old tipsy witch. He lifted his free
hand in greeting without changing his attitude, which although not unfamiliar to me
struck me this time as more forlorn than pensive.
"Well," I said, "has the muse been kind to you?"
"Very kind," he replied, slightly bowing his hand-propped head. "exceptionally kind
and gentle. In fact, I have here [indicating a huge pregnant envelope near him on the
oilcloth] practically the entire product. A few trifles to settle and [suddenly striking
the table with his fist] I've swung it, by God."
The envelope, unfastened at one end, bulged with stacked cards.
"Where is the missus?" I asked (mouth dry).
"Help me, Charlie, to get out of here," he pleaded. "Foot gone to sleep. Sybil is at a
dinner-meeting of her club."
"A suggestion," I said, quivering. "I have at my place half a gallon of Tokay. I'm
ready to share my favorite wine with my favorite poet. We shall have for dinner a
knackle of walnuts, a couple of large tomatoes, and a bunch of bananas. And if you
agree to show me your 'finished product,' there will be another treat: I promise to
divulge to you why I gave you, or rather who gave you, your theme."
"What theme?" said Shade absently, as he leaned on my arm and gradually recovered
the use of his numb limb.
"Our blue inenubilable Zembla, and the red-capped Steinmann, and the motorboat in
the sea cave, and -"
"Ah," said Shade, "I think I guessed your secret quite some time ago. But all the same
I shall sample your wine with pleasure. Okay, I can manage by myself now."
Well did I know he could never resist a golden drop of this or that, especially since he
was severely rationed at home. With an inward leap of exultation I relieved him of the
large envelope that hampered his movements as he descended the steps of the porch,
sideways, like a hesitating infant. We crossed the lawn, we crossed the road. Clinkclank, came the horseshoe music from Mystery Lodge. In the large envelope I carried
I could feel the hard-cornered, rubberbanded batches of index cards. We are absurdly
accustomed to the miracle of a few written signs being able to contain immortal
imagery, involutions of thought, new worlds with live people, speaking, weeping,
laughing. We take it for granted so simply that in a sense, by the very act of brutish
routine acceptance, we undo the work of the ages, the history of the gradual
elaboration of poetical description and construction, from the treeman to Browning,
from the caveman to Keats. What if we awake one day, all of us, and find ourselves
utterly unable to read? I wish you to gasp not only at what you read but at the miracle
of its being readable (so I used to tell my students). Although I am capable, through
long dabbling in blue magic, of imitating any prose in the world (but singularly
enough not verse - I am a miserable rhymester), I do not consider myself a true artist,
save in one matter: I can do what only a true artist can do - pounce upon the forgotten
butterfly of revelation, wean myself abruptly from the habit of things, see the web of
the world, and the warp and the weft of that web. Solemnly I weighed in my hand
what I was carrying under my left armpit, and for a moment, I found myself enriched
with an indescribable amazement as if informed that fireflies were making decodable
signals on behalf of stranded spirits, or that a bat was writing a legible tale of torture
in the bruised and branded sky.
I was holding all Zembla pressed to my heart.
