Line 998: Some neighbor's gardener
Some neighbor's! The poet had seen my gardener many times, and this vagueness I
can only assign to his desire (noticeable elsewhere in his handling of names, etc.) to
give a certain poetical patina, the bloom of remoteness, to familiar figures and things although it is just possible he might have mistaken him in the broken light for a
stranger working for a stranger. This gifted gardener I discovered by chance one idle
spring day. when I was slowly wending my way home after a maddening and
embarrassing experience at the college indoor swimming pool. He stood at the top of
a green ladder attending to the sick branch of a grateful tree in one of the most famous
avenues in Appalachia. His red flannel shirt lay on the grass. We conversed, a little
shyly, he above, I below. I was pleasantly surprised at his being able to refer all his
patients to their proper habitats. It was spring, and we were alone in that admirable
colonnade of trees which visitors from England have photographed from end to end. I
can enumerate here only a few kinds of those trees: Jove's stout oak and two others:
the thunder-cloven from Britain, the knotty-entrailed from a Mediterranean island; a
weatherfending line (now lime), a phoenix (now date palm), a pine and a cedar
(Cedrus), all insular; a Venetian sycamore tree (Acer); two willows, the green,
likewise from Venice, the hoar-leaved from Denmark; a midsummer elm, its barky
fingers enringed with ivy; a midsummer mulberry, its shade inviting to tarry; and a
clown's sad cypress from Illyria.

He had worked for two years as a male nurse in a hospital for Negroes in Maryland.
He was hard up. He wanted to study landscaping, botany and French ("to read in the
original Baudelaire and Dumas"). I promised him some financial assistance. He
started to work at my place the very next day. He was awfully nice and pathetic, and
all that, but a little too talkative and completely impotent which I found discouraging.
Otherwise he was a strong strapping fellow, and I hugely enjoyed the aesthetic
pleasure of watching him buoyantly struggle with earth and turf or delicately
manipulate bulbs, or lay out the flagged path which may or may not be a nice surprise
for my landlord, when he safely returns from England (where I hope no bloodthirsty
maniacs are stalking him!). How I longed to have him (my gardener, not my landlord)
wear a great big turban, and shalwars, and an ankle bracelet. I would certainly have
him attired according to the old romanticist notion of a Moorish prince, had I been a
northern king - or rather had I still been a king (exile becomes a bad habit). You will
chide me, my modest man, for writing so much about you in this note, but I feel I
must pay you this tribute. After all, you saved my life. You and I were the last people
who saw John Shade alive, and you admitted afterwards to a strange premonition
which made you interrupt your work as; you noticed us from the shrubbery walking
toward the porch where stood - (Superstitiously I cannot write out the odd dark word
you employed.)
~
